Elinor felt equal amazement .
He paid her only the compliment of attention ; and she felt a respect for him on the occasion , which the others had reasonably forfeited by their shameless want of taste .
Mamma says  he  was in love with your sister too .
This remark was not calculated to make Edward or Elinor more easy , nor to conciliate the good will of Lucy , who looked up at Marianne with no very benignant expression .
They have borne more than our conduct .
For four months , Marianne , I have had all this hanging on my mind , without being at liberty to speak of it to a single creature ; knowing that it would make you and my mother most unhappy whenever it were explained to you , yet unable to prepare you for it in the least .
I should like the work exceedingly , if she would allow me a share in it .
The change which a few hours had wrought in the minds and the happiness of the Dashwoods , was such -- so great -- as promised them all , the satisfaction of a sleepless night .
Only to Honiton .
She knows her own worth too well for false shame , replied Edward .
These are done by my eldest sister , said he ; and you , as a man of taste , will , I dare say , be pleased with them .
She loved the child , and had always kept it with her .
She trembled , her eyes were fixed on the ground , and her lips became whiter than even sickness had left them .
Conversation however was not wanted , for Sir John was very chatty , and Lady Middleton had taken the wise precaution of bringing with her their eldest child , a fine little boy about six years old , by which means there was one subject always to be recurred to by the ladies in case of extremity , for they had to enquire his name and age , admire his beauty , and ask him questions which his mother answered for him , while he hung about her and held down his head , to the great surprise of her ladyship , who wondered at his being so shy before company , as he could make noise enough at home .
The openness and heartiness of her manner more than atoned for that want of recollection and elegance which made her often deficient in the forms of politeness ; her kindness , recommended by so pretty a face , was engaging ; her folly , though evident was not disgusting , because it was not conceited ; and Elinor could have forgiven every thing but her laugh .
What I thought , what I feared , may be imagined ; and what I suffered too .
It shall not be put off when we are so near it .
Nobody was there .
Pray , when are they to be married ? 
Months ! cried Marianne , with strong surprise .
You must know best what will be its effect ; but had I not seriously , and from my heart believed it might be of service , might lessen her regrets , I would not have suffered myself to trouble you with this account of my family afflictions , with a recital which may seem to have been intended to raise myself at the expense of others .
Elinor , this eldest daughter , whose advice was so effectual , possessed a strength of understanding , and coolness of judgment , which qualified her , though only nineteen , to be the counsellor of her mother , and enabled her frequently to counteract , to the advantage of them all , that eagerness of mind in Mrs. Dashwood which must generally have led to imprudence .
Elinor for a few moments remained silent .
Did I imitate your forbearance , or lessen your restraints , by taking any part in those offices of general complaisance or particular gratitude which you had hitherto been left to discharge alone ? 
But Elinor had more to do ; and so anxious was she , for his sake and her own , to do it well , that she forced herself , after a moment's recollection , to welcome him , with a look and manner that were almost easy , and almost open ; and another struggle , another effort still improved them .
No one , at least , can think I have not done enough for them :  even themselves , they can hardly expect more .
Marianne's countenance sunk .
But this is the usual way of heightening alarm , where there is nothing to be alarmed at in reality .
I have , returned Elinor , colouring likewise , and hardening her heart anew against any compassion for him , I have heard it all .
At her time of life , any thing of an illness destroys the bloom for ever !
I'm sure there's a vast many smart beaux in Exeter ; but you know , how could I tell what smart beaux there might be about Norland ; and I was only afraid the Miss Dashwoods might find it dull at Barton , if they had not so many as they used to have .
Yes :  could that be wrong after all that had passed ? 
But they had no curiosity to see how Mr. and Mrs. Palmer ate their dinner , and no expectation of pleasure from them in any other way .
Mrs. Jennings , however , with a kindness of heart which made Elinor really love her , declared her resolution of not stirring from Cleveland as long as Marianne remained ill , and of endeavouring , by her own attentive care , to supply to her the place of the mother she had taken her from ; and Elinor found her on every occasion a most willing and active helpmate , desirous to share in all her fatigues , and often by her better experience in nursing , of material use .
I will not say that I am disappointed , my dear sister , said John , as they were walking together one morning before the gates of Delaford House ,  that  would be saying too much , for certainly you have been one of the most fortunate young women in the world , as it is .
I was very unwilling to enter into it , as you may imagine , without the knowledge and approbation of his mother ; but I was too young , and loved him too well , to be so prudent as I ought to have been .
Where is Marianne ? 
I remember her perfectly .
In this situation , Elinor , roused from sleep by her agitation and sobs , first perceived her ; and after observing her for a few moments with silent anxiety , said , in a tone of the most considerate gentleness --   Marianne , may I ask --   No , Elinor , she replied , ask nothing ; you will soon know all .
Two maids and two men , indeed ! -- as I talked of t'other day .
How could he answer it to himself to rob his child , and his only child too , of so large a sum ? 
Mrs. Jennings soon appeared , and the note being given her , she read it aloud .
I am charged with a most agreeable office (breathing rather faster than usual as she spoke.)
He then hastily took leave of them all and left the room .
And  that  , he presently added , might perhaps be in  his  head when the acquaintance between them first began .
My illness has made me think .
Her wretchedness I could have borne , but her passion -- her malice -- at all events it must be appeased .
The letter was from this gentleman himself , and written in the true spirit of friendly accommodation .
Consider , she added , that when the money is once parted with , it never can return .
He stopped .
I suppose you have not so many in this part of the world ; for my part , I think they are a vast addition always .
I have just received my dispatches , and taken my farewell of Allenham ; and by way of exhilaration I am now come to take my farewell of you .
And who knows but you may raise a dance , said she .
It was only the last time they met that he had offered him one of Folly's puppies ! and this was the end of it !
She almost ran out of the room , and as soon as the door was closed , burst into tears of joy , which at first she thought would never cease .
Her sorrow , her disappointment , her deep regret , when I told her that I was obliged to leave Devonshire so immediately -- I never shall forget it -- united too with such reliance , such confidence in me !
Yes , I saw every note that passed .
The repose of the latter became more and more disturbed ; and her sister , who watched , with unremitting attention her continual change of posture , and heard the frequent but inarticulate sounds of complaint which passed her lips , was almost wishing to rouse her from so painful a slumber , when Marianne , suddenly awakened by some accidental noise in the house , started hastily up , and , with feverish wildness , cried out , --   Is mama coming ?  --   Not yet , cried the other , concealing her terror , and assisting Marianne to lie down again , but she will be here , I hope , before it is long .
Why was it necessary to call ? 
The little she said was all in lamentation of this inevitable delay ; though Elinor tried to raise her spirits , and make her believe , as she  then  really believed herself , that it would be a very short one .
She found that she had been misled by the careful , the considerate attention of her daughter , to think the attachment , which once she had so well understood , much slighter in reality , than she had been wont to believe , or than it was now proved to be .
In the society of his nephew and niece , and their children , the old Gentleman's days were comfortably spent .
His concern however was very apparent ; and after expressing it with earnestness , he added , in the same low voice , But , Marianne , the horse is still yours , though you cannot use it now .
You are mistaken , Elinor ; you are very much mistaken .
Where does he come from ? 
But he told you that he loved you .
I am extremely sorry for it ; for I know him to be a very good-hearted creature , -- as well-meaning a fellow perhaps , as any in the world .
I only wish , replied her sister , there were any thing I  could  do , which might be of comfort to you .
I know they will ; but I am sure I would not do such a thing for all the world .
Five hundred a year !
Should not the Colonel write himself ? 
In the promotion of this object she was zealously active , as far as her ability reached ; and missed no opportunity of projecting weddings among all the young people of her acquaintance .
She liked him -- in spite of his gravity and reserve , she beheld in him an object of interest .
What a softener of the heart was this persuasion !
In that point , however , and that only , he erred ; for though Lucy soon gave him hopes that his eloquence would convince her in  time  , another visit , another conversation , was always wanted to produce this conviction .
I could not answer it .
Comparisons would occur -- regrets would arise ; -- and her joy , though sincere as her love for her sister , was of a kind to give her neither spirits nor language .
If he had but my picture , he says he should be easy .
Prescriptions poured in from all quarters , and as usual , were all declined .
Marianne , now looking dreadfully white , and unable to stand , sunk into her chair , and Elinor , expecting every moment to see her faint , tried to screen her from the observation of others , while reviving her with lavender water .
This seems to have been a day of general elucidation , for this very morning first unfolded it to us .
Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this ; but to a man and a soldier she presumed not to censure it .
Beautifully indeed !
Though Mrs. Jennings was in the habit of spending a large portion of the year at the houses of her children and friends , she was not without a settled habitation of her own .
Had he been even old , ugly , and vulgar , the gratitude and kindness of Mrs. Dashwood would have been secured by any act of attention to her child ; but the influence of youth , beauty , and elegance , gave an interest to the action which came home to her feelings .
There were moments in abundance , when , if not by the absence of her mother and sisters , at least by the nature of their employments , conversation was forbidden among them , and every effect of solitude was produced .
A small green court was the whole of its demesne in front ; and a neat wicket gate admitted them into it .
This is very unfortunate .
Elinor , having once delivered her opinion on William's side , by which she offended Mrs. Ferrars and Fanny still more , did not see the necessity of enforcing it by any farther assertion ; and Marianne , when called on for her's , offended them all , by declaring that she had no opinion to give , as she had never thought about it .
As soon as they returned to the carriage , Mrs. Jennings was eager for information ; but as Elinor wished to spread as little as possible intelligence that had in the first place been so unfairly obtained , she confined herself to the brief repetition of such simple particulars , as she felt assured that Lucy , for the sake of her own consequence , would choose to have known .
Mrs. Dashwood declared they should not stay a minute longer in the house , and your brother was forced to go down upon  his  knees too , to persuade her to let them stay till they had packed up their clothes .
So do I .
When Lucy first came to Barton Park last November , she told me in confidence of her engagement .
But Mrs. John Dashwood was a strong caricature of himself ; more narrow-minded and selfish .
Nothing could replace him , therefore , in her former esteem , nor injure the interests of Colonel Brandon .
However it may have come about , said Elinor , after a pause , -- they are certainly married .
His own two thousand pounds she protested should be his all ; she would never see him again ; and so far would she be from affording him the smallest assistance , that if he were to enter into any profession with a view of better support , she would do all in her power to prevent him advancing in it .
They were cheered by the joy of the servants on their arrival , and each for the sake of the others resolved to appear happy .
My father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me than what you say .
When do you go back again ? 
But perseverance in humility of conduct and messages , in self-condemnation for Robert's offence , and gratitude for the unkindness she was treated with , procured her in time the haughty notice which overcame her by its graciousness , and led soon afterwards , by rapid degrees , to the highest state of affection and influence .
They think themselves secure , you do no more than what is expected , and it raises no gratitude at all .
They both eagerly and resolutely declined her invitation .
Elinor scolded him , harshly as ladies always scold the imprudence which compliments themselves , for having spent so much time with them at Norland , when he must have felt his own inconstancy .
Elinor was employed in walking thoughtfully from the fire to the window , from the window to the fire , without knowing that she received warmth from one , or discerning objects through the other ; and Marianne , seated at the foot of the bed , with her head leaning against one of its posts , again took up Willoughby's letter , and , after shuddering over every sentence , exclaimed --   It is too much !
I remember her promising to give you some .
Did she show it you ? 
She had been for three months her companion , was still under her care , and she was known to have been greatly injured , and long unhappy .
There now , -- said his lady , you see Mr. Palmer expects you ; so you cannot refuse to come .
Pray assure him of it .
You want nothing but patience -- or give it a more fascinating name , call it hope .
His society became gradually her most exquisite enjoyment .
I am rather of a jealous temper too by nature , and from our different situations in life , from his being so much more in the world than me , and our continual separation , I was enough inclined for suspicion , to have found out the truth in an instant , if there had been the slightest alteration in his behaviour to me when we met , or any lowness of spirits that I could not account for , or if he had talked more of one lady than another , or seemed in any respect less happy at Longstaple than he used to be .
He had been to several families that morning in hopes of procuring some addition to their number , but it was moonlight and every body was full of engagements .
We are never safe from  him .
She will tell you any thing if you ask .
Willoughby thought the same ; and their behaviour at all times , was an illustration of their opinions .
She was sensible and clever ; but eager in everything :  her sorrows , her joys , could have no moderation .
She sat in silence almost all the way , wrapt in her own meditations , and scarcely ever voluntarily speaking , except when any object of picturesque beauty within their view drew from her an exclamation of delight exclusively addressed to her sister .
He was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation , and seemed not to hear her .
But whether she would do for a lady's maid , I am sure I can't tell .
I am afraid , none at all .
Such weather makes every thing and every body disgusting .
With strong concern , and with many reproaches for not being called to their aid , did Mrs. Jennings hear in the morning of what had passed .
Time , a very little time , I tell him , will do everything ; Marianne's heart is not to be wasted for ever on such a man as Willoughby .
Now , Palmer , you shall see a monstrous pretty girl .
In feeling , in action , in condition , in every thing .
My love , have you been asleep ? said his wife , laughing .
The impertinence of these kind of scrutinies , moreover , was generally concluded with a compliment , which though meant as its douceur , was considered by Marianne as the greatest impertinence of all ; for after undergoing an examination into the value and make of her gown , the colour of her shoes , and the arrangement of her hair , she was almost sure of being told that upon her word she looked vastly smart , and she dared to say she would make a great many conquests .
I should be very glad to get her so good a mistress .
She explained the situation .
Not in the stage , I assure you , replied Miss Steele , with quick exultation ; we came post all the way , and had a very smart beau to attend us .
All that she wants is gossip , and she only likes me now because I supply it .
Yes ; and the set of breakfast china is twice as handsome as what belongs to this house .
Her breath , her skin , her lips , all flattered Elinor with signs of amendment ; and Marianne fixed her eyes on her with a rational , though languid , gaze .
I was last month at my friend Elliott's , near Dartford .
It is strange , replied Elinor , in a most painful perplexity , that I should never have heard him even mention your name .
Aye , aye , that is the fact , depend upon it .
But if she  did  , the letter was written and sent away with a privacy which eluded all her watchfulness to ascertain the fact .
MY DEAR MADAM ,       I have just had the honour of receiving your letter , for      which I beg to return my sincere acknowledgments .
But I thought of her , I believe , every moment of the day .
Mrs. Jennings wrote to tell the wonderful tale , to vent her honest indignation against the jilting girl , and pour forth her compassion towards poor Mr. Edward , who , she was sure , had quite doted upon the worthless hussy , and was now , by all accounts , almost broken-hearted , at Oxford .
Willoughby , what is the meaning of this ? 
But , upon my soul , I did  not  know it , he warmly replied ; I did not recollect that I had omitted to give her my direction ; and common sense might have told her how to find it out .
They read , they talked , they sang together ; his musical talents were considerable ; and he read with all the sensibility and spirit which Edward had unfortunately wanted .
Mama , the more I know of the world , the more am I convinced that I shall never see a man whom I can really love .
Elinor remembered what Robert had told her in Harley Street , of his opinion of what his own mediation in his brother's affairs might have done , if applied to in time .
Mrs. Jennings , however , assured him directly , that she should not stand upon ceremony , for they were all cousins , or something like it , and she should certainly wait on Mrs. John Dashwood very soon , and bring her sisters to see her .
Nothing new was heard by them , for a day or two afterwards , of affairs in Harley Street , or Bartlett's Buildings .
How often did I wish , added he , when I was at Allenham this time twelvemonth , that Barton cottage were inhabited !
Had he never owned his affection to yourself ? 
Elinor's marriage divided her as little from her family as could well be contrived , without rendering the cottage at Barton entirely useless , for her mother and sisters spent much more than half their time with her .
She was not a woman of many words ; for , unlike people in general , she proportioned them to the number of her ideas ; and of the few syllables that did escape her , not one fell to the share of Miss Dashwood , whom she eyed with the spirited determination of disliking her at all events .
But , to be sure , Lucy would not give ear to such kind of talking ; so she told him directly with a great deal about sweet and love , you know , and all that -- Oh , la ! one can't repeat such kind of things you know -- she told him directly , she had not the least mind in the world to be off , for she could live with him upon a trifle , and how little so ever he might have , she should be very glad to have it all , you know , or something of the kind .
The visit of the Miss Steeles at Barton Park was lengthened far beyond what the first invitation implied .
It was within four miles northward of Exeter .
But what was that , when such friends were to be met ? 
In this manner they had continued about a quarter of an hour , when Marianne , whose nerves could not then bear any sudden noise , was startled by a rap at the door .
How have I delighted , as I walked , to see them driven in showers about me by the wind !
Is there nothing one can get to comfort her ? 
Mrs. Palmer , on the contrary , who was strongly endowed by nature with a turn for being uniformly civil and happy , was hardly seated before her admiration of the parlour and every thing in it burst forth .
Nobody could tell .
Elinor read and returned it without any comment .
Elinor , cried Marianne , is this fair ? is this just ?  are my ideas so scanty ? 
Mr. Palmer is so droll ! said she , in a whisper , to Elinor .
Certainly ; and I think I may afford to give them five hundred pounds a-piece .
One or two meetings of this kind had taken place , without affording Elinor any chance of engaging Lucy in private , when Sir John called at the cottage one morning , to beg , in the name of charity , that they would all dine with Lady Middleton that day , as he was obliged to attend the club at Exeter , and she would otherwise be quite alone , except her mother and the two Miss Steeles .
Indeed , I think I may say that you cannot , for your behaviour to him is perfectly cordial , and if  that  were your opinion , I am sure you could never be civil to him .
Her mind was so much weakened that she still fancied present exertion impossible , and therefore it only dispirited her more .
Elinor submitted to the arrangement which counteracted her wishes with less reluctance than she had expected to feel .
It puts him quite out of heart .
You may see her if you look this way .
In my eyes it would be no marriage at all , but that would be nothing .
You have perhaps been misinformed , or      purposely deceived , in something concerning me , which may      have lowered me in your opinion .
Not that you have any reason to regret , my dear Elinor .
And that I fancy , will be the end of it .
Her's , for me , was , I believe , fervent as the attachment of your sister to Mr. Willoughby and it was , though from a different cause , no less unfortunate .
This , said he , cannot hold ; but a change , a total change of sentiments -- No , no , do not desire it ; for when the romantic refinements of a young mind are obliged to give way , how frequently are they succeeded by such opinions as are but too common , and too dangerous !
She recommended it to her daughters , therefore , by all means not to shorten their visit to Mrs. Jennings ; the length of which , though never exactly fixed , had been expected by all to comprise at least five or six weeks .
Why else should he have shown such unwillingness to accept your invitation here ? 
I have more pleasure in a snug farm-house than a watch-tower , -- and a troop of tidy , happy villages please me better than the finest banditti in the world .
Mrs. John Dashwood had never been a favourite with any of her husband's family ; but she had had no opportunity , till the present , of showing them with how little attention to the comfort of other people she could act when occasion required it .
His heart was now open to Elinor , all its weaknesses , all its errors confessed , and his first boyish attachment to Lucy treated with all the philosophic dignity of twenty-four .
The business of self-command she settled very easily ; -- with strong affections it was impossible , with calm ones it could have no merit .
He was silent and grave .
I never had any conjectures about it , replied Margaret ; it was you who told me of it yourself .
Hitherto she had carefully avoided every companion in her rambles .
Towards the evening Marianne became ill again , growing more heavy , restless , and uncomfortable than before .
Sir John did not much understand this reproof ; but he laughed as heartily as if he did , and then replied --   Ay , you will make conquests enough , I dare say , one way or other .
Sir John Middleton was a good looking man about forty .
You cannot go to town till tomorrow , Brandon , that is all .
As soon as Elinor had finished it , she performed what she concluded to be its writer's real design , by placing it in the hands of Mrs. Jennings , who read it aloud with many comments of satisfaction and praise .
But she could hear of no situation that at once answered her notions of comfort and ease , and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter , whose steadier judgment rejected several houses as too large for their income , which her mother would have approved .
Well , said Elinor , it is a comfort to be prepared against the worst .
 --   The first news that reached me of her , he continued , came in a letter from herself , last October .
Extend it a little farther , and it will make me happy .
The calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton on the occasion was a happy relief to Elinor's spirits , oppressed as they often were by the clamorous kindness of the others .
Sir John never came to the Dashwoods without either inviting them to dine at the park the next day , or to drink tea with them that evening .
Yes , -- I left London this morning at eight o'clock , and the only ten minutes I have spent out of my chaise since that time procured me a nuncheon at Marlborough .
Willoughby first rousing himself , broke it thus :   Well , let me make haste and be gone .
She will be mistaken , however .
His complexion was white with agitation , and he looked as if fearful of his reception , and conscious that he merited no kind one .
Not above ten miles , I dare say .
She received the news with resolute composure ; made no observation on it , and at first shed no tears ; but after a short time they would burst out , and for the rest of the day , she was in a state hardly less pitiable than when she first learnt to expect the event .
Mr. John Dashwood told his mother again and again how exceedingly sorry he was that she had taken a house at such a distance from Norland as to prevent his being of any service to her in removing her furniture .
But that was not enough ; for when people are determined on a mode of conduct which they know to be wrong , they feel injured by the expectation of any thing better from them .
My behaviour must have seemed strange to you then ; but now you will comprehend it .
I can only pronounce him to be a sensible man , well-bred , well-informed , of gentle address , and , I believe , possessing an amiable heart .
Thank you , Willoughby .
Elinor said no more .
She moved away and sat down .
Mrs. Jennings told me , said he , that you wished to speak with me , at least I understood her so -- or I certainly should not have intruded on you in such a manner ; though at the same time , I should have been extremely sorry to leave London without seeing you and your sister ; especially as it will most likely be some time -- it is not probable that I should soon have the pleasure of meeting you again .
The servant , who saw only that Miss Marianne was taken ill , had sense enough to call one of the maids , who , with Mrs. Dashwood's assistance , supported her into the other room .
Edward have got some business at Oxford , he says ; so he must go there for a time ; and after  that  , as soon as he can light upon a Bishop , he will be ordained .
She insisted on being left behind , the next morning , when the others went out .
Five hundred pounds would be a prodigious increase to their fortunes !
They each felt his sorrows , and their own obligations , and Marianne , by general consent , was to be the reward of all .
The same warmth of heart , the same eagerness of fancy and spirits .
I thought our judgments were given us merely to be subservient to those of neighbours .
Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer .
The card-table was then placed , and Elinor began to wonder at herself for having ever entertained a hope of finding time for conversation at the park .
The comfort of such a friend at that moment as Colonel Brandon -- or such a companion for her mother , -- how gratefully was it felt ! -- a companion whose judgment would guide , whose attendance must relieve , and whose friendship might soothe her ! -- as far as the shock of such a summons  could  be lessened to her , his presence , his manners , his assistance , would lessen it .
I should have been quite disappointed if I had not found you here  still  , said she repeatedly , with a strong emphasis on the word .
Marianne's feelings did not stop here .
Edward returned to them with fresh admiration of the surrounding country ; in his walk to the village , he had seen many parts of the valley to advantage ; and the village itself , in a much higher situation than the cottage , afforded a general view of the whole , which had exceedingly pleased him .
Elinor , persuaded that he had some communication to make in which her sister was concerned , impatiently expected its opening .
Have you forgot , Marianne , how many pleasant days we have owed to them ? 
Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point .
The arrival of a new family in the country was always a matter of joy to him , and in every point of view he was charmed with the inhabitants he had now procured for his cottage at Barton .
Have we not perfectly understood each other ? 
It was not forced on you .
 My  gratitude will be insured immediately by any information tending to that end , and  hers  must be gained by it in time .
I am afraid , replied Elinor , that the pleasantness of an employment does not always evince its propriety .
She instantly saw that it was not unnoticed by him , that he even observed Marianne as she quitted the room , with such astonishment and concern , as hardly left him the recollection of what civility demanded towards herself .
Few people of common prudence will do  that  ; and whatever she saves , she will be able to dispose of .
The composure of mind with which I have brought myself at present to consider the matter , the consolation that I have been willing to admit , have been the effect of constant and painful exertion ; they did not spring up of themselves ; they did not occur to relieve my spirits at first .
Did not I see them together in Devonshire every day , and all day long ; and did not I know that your sister came to town with me on purpose to buy wedding clothes ? 
Shall I tell you .
But I dare say you will go for all that .
But the feelings of the past could not be recalled .
In Colonel Brandon alone , of all her new acquaintance , did Elinor find a person who could in any degree claim the respect of abilities , excite the interest of friendship , or give pleasure as a companion .
Edward saw enough to comprehend , not only the meaning of others , but such of Marianne's expressions as had puzzled him before ; and when their visitors left them , he went immediately round her , and said , in a whisper , I have been guessing .
But what are his manners on more intimate acquaintance ? 
Two thousand a-year ; and then working himself up to a pitch of enthusiastic generosity , he added , Elinor , I wish with all my heart it were  twice  as much , for your sake .
I could wish the stairs were handsome .
That would be enough for us to marry upon , and we might trust to time and chance for the rest .
He wished her a good morning , and , attended by Sir John , left the room .
Lucy , who was hardly less anxious to please one parent than the other , thought the boys were both remarkably tall for their age , and could not conceive that there could be the smallest difference in the world between them ; and Miss Steele , with yet greater address gave it , as fast as she could , in favour of each .
He did not know what he was talking of , I dare say ; ten to one but he was light-headed at the time .
But there was one method so direct , so simple , and in her opinion so eligible of knowing the real state of the affair , and of instantly removing all mystery , that she could not help suggesting it to her mother .
Certainly , answered Elinor , without knowing what she said ; but after a moment's reflection , she added , with revived security of Edward's honour and love , and her companion's falsehood -- Engaged to Mr. Edward Ferrars ! -- I confess myself so totally surprised at what you tell me , that really -- I beg your pardon ; but surely there must be some mistake of person or name .
But I can't bear to see them dirty and nasty .
I tried -- but could not frame a sentence .
Will you repeat to your sister when she is recovered , what I have been telling you ?  -- Let me be a little lightened too in her opinion as well as in yours .
A doubt of her regard , supposing him to feel it , need not give him more than inquietude .
And yet two thousand a-year is a very moderate income , said Marianne .
And you really are not engaged to him ! said she .
You have not been able to bring your sister over to your plan of general civility , said Edward to Elinor , Do you gain no ground ? 
No ; considering our situation , it was not strange .
To the Middletons , to the Palmers , the Steeles , to every common acquaintance even , I had been insolent and unjust ; with a heart hardened against their merits , and a temper irritated by their very attention .
She knew I had no regard for her when we married .
If such is your way of thinking , said Marianne , if the loss of what is most valued is so easily to be made up by something else , your resolution , your self-command , are , perhaps , a little less to be wondered at .
When Mrs. Jennings attacked her one evening at the park , to give the name of the young man who was Elinor's particular favourite , which had been long a matter of great curiosity to her , Margaret answered by looking at her sister , and saying , I must not tell , may I , Elinor ? 
But this he declined , as he was dirty and wet .
The house , too , as described by Sir John , was on so simple a scale , and the rent so uncommonly moderate , as to leave her no right of objection on either point ; and , therefore , though it was not a plan which brought any charm to her fancy , though it was a removal from the vicinity of Norland beyond her wishes , she made no attempt to dissuade her mother from sending a letter of acquiescence .
Indeed , answered Elinor , I have  not  forgotten it .
Mrs. Dashwood first spoke .
But whatever might be the particulars of their separation , her sister's affliction was indubitable ; and she thought with the tenderest compassion of that violent sorrow which Marianne was in all probability not merely giving way to as a relief , but feeding and encouraging as a duty .
But  she  does every thing well .
My beau , indeed ! said I -- I cannot think who you mean .
Is that Fanny's hair ? 
Allow me to congratulate you on having so respectable and well-judging a friend , and to join in his wish that the living -- it is about two hundred a-year -- were much more considerable , and such as might better enable you to -- as might be more than a temporary accommodation to yourself -- such , in short , as might establish all your views of happiness .
He may live twenty years longer .
 --   Marianne was quite subdued .
They will be much more able to give  you  something .
Do you compare your conduct with his ? 
The carriages were then ordered ; Willoughby's was first , and Marianne never looked happier than when she got into it .
Edward was , of course , immediately convinced that nothing could have been more natural than Lucy's conduct , nor more self-evident than the motive of it .
The pity of such a woman as Lady Middleton !
What a pity it is , Elinor , said Marianne , that Edward should have no taste for drawing .
Mrs. Ferrars is one of the most affectionate mothers in the world .
But I have just left Marianne in bed , and , I hope , almost asleep ; and as I think nothing will be of so much service to her as rest , if you will give me leave , I will drink the wine myself .
She met him with a hand that would be taken , and a voice that expressed the affection of a sister .
Mrs. Dashwood's visit to Lady Middleton took place the next day , and two of her daughters went with her ; but Marianne excused herself from being of the party , under some trifling pretext of employment ; and her mother , who concluded that a promise had been made by Willoughby the night before of calling on her while they were absent , was perfectly satisfied with her remaining at home .
Will you not shake hands with me ? 
You can't think how much I longed to see you !
Are you , indeed , going there ? 
A few years however will settle her opinions on the reasonable basis of common sense and observation ; and then they may be more easy to define and to justify than they now are , by any body but herself .
But though so much of the matter was known to them already , that Mrs. Jennings might have had enough to do in spreading that knowledge farther , without seeking after more , she had resolved from the first to pay a visit of comfort and inquiry to her cousins as soon as she could ; and nothing but the hindrance of more visitors than usual , had prevented her going to them within that time .
So altered -- so faded -- worn down by acute suffering of every kind ! hardly could I believe the melancholy and sickly figure before me , to be the remains of the lovely , blooming , healthful girl , on whom I had once doted .
Her sister , however , still sanguine , was willing to attribute the change to nothing more than the fatigue of having sat up to have her bed made ; and carefully administering the cordials prescribed , saw her , with satisfaction , sink at last into a slumber , from which she expected the most beneficial effects .
Oh , they are talking of their favourite beaux , I dare say .
You surprise me very much .
But have I ever known it ? 
I shall go to the piano-forte ; I have not touched it since it was tuned .
Poor soul !
She concluded with a very kind invitation to Mr. and Mrs. John Dashwood to visit her at Barton ; and to Edward she gave one with still greater affection .
But she raises none in those most concerned .
Your behaviour was certainly very wrong , said she ; because -- to say nothing of my own conviction , our relations were all led away by it to fancy and expect  what  , as you were  then  situated , could never be .
Mrs. Dashwood , not less watchful of what passed than her daughter , but with a mind very differently influenced , and therefore watching to very different effect , saw nothing in the Colonel's behaviour but what arose from the most simple and self-evident sensations , while in the actions and words of Marianne she persuaded herself to think that something more than gratitude already dawned .
It won't do .
But Mrs. Ferrars is a very headstrong proud woman , and in her first fit of anger upon hearing it , would very likely secure every thing to Robert , and the idea of that , for Edward's sake , frightens away all my inclination for hasty measures .
The Middletons were to follow in about a week .
I think , Elinor , she presently added , we must employ Edward to take care of us in our return to Barton .
Do but look , mama , how sweet !
It was a contrast which recommended him most forcibly to her mother .
Indeed ! replied Lucy ; I wonder at that , for I thought you must have seen her at Norland sometimes .
What would you advise me to do in such a case , Miss Dashwood ? 
She read what made her wretched .
When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of the season , a very awful pause took place .
Do not boast of it , however , said Elinor , for it is injustice in both of you .
In such moments of precious , invaluable misery , she rejoiced in tears of agony to be at Cleveland ; and as she returned by a different circuit to the house , feeling all the happy privilege of country liberty , of wandering from place to place in free and luxurious solitude , she resolved to spend almost every hour of every day while she remained with the Palmers , in the indulgence of such solitary rambles .
She repeated it to Edward .
I am glad to find , however , from what you say , that he is a respectable young man , and one whose acquaintance will not be ineligible .
I understand you .
To this determination she was the more easily reconciled , by recollecting that Edward Ferrars , by Lucy's account , was not to be in town before February ; and that their visit , without any unreasonable abridgement , might be previously finished .
It was not the first time of her feeling the same kind of conviction ; for , more than once before , beginning with the observation of your sister looks unwell to-day , or your sister seems out of spirits , he had appeared on the point , either of disclosing , or of inquiring , something particular about her .
Marianne , beautiful as an angel on one side , calling me Willoughby in such a tone !
She has borne it all , with the fortitude of an angel !
I cannot express my own abhorrence of myself .
However , I don't think her hardly at all handsomer than you , I assure you ; for I think you both excessively pretty , and so does Mr. Palmer too I am sure , though we could not get him to own it last night .
Again he stopped to recover himself ; and Elinor spoke her feelings in an exclamation of tender concern , at the fate of his unfortunate friend .
Perhaps it is about Miss Williams and , by the bye , I dare say it is , because he looked so conscious when I mentioned her .
Don't pretend to defend him .
Come , come ; this is all an effusion of immediate want of spirits , Edward .
Well , at last , as I need not tell you , you were forced on me ; and what a sweet figure I cut ! what an evening of agony it was !
I am sure Edward Ferrars is not well .
But you would still be reserved , said Marianne , and that is worse .
We are all unanimous in that wish , I suppose , said Elinor , in spite of the insufficiency of wealth .
Twill be a fine thing to have her married so young to be sure , said she , and I hear he is quite a beau , and prodigious handsome .
When the dessert and the wine were arranged , and Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor were left by themselves , they remained long together in a similarity of thoughtfulness and silence .
For shame , for shame , Miss Dashwood ! how can you talk so ? 
But , indeed , Elinor , it is Marianne's .
The contempt which she had , very early in their acquaintance , felt for her daughter-in-law , was very much increased by the farther knowledge of her character , which half a year's residence in her family afforded ; and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal affection on the side of the former , the two ladies might have found it impossible to have lived together so long , had not a particular circumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility , according to the opinions of Mrs. Dashwood , to her daughters' continuance at Norland .
Benevolent , philanthropic man !
Elinor was pleased that he had called ; and still more pleased that she had missed him .
But one or the other , if not both of them , I must have .
When their promised visit to the Park and consequent introduction to these young ladies took place , they found in the appearance of the eldest , who was nearly thirty , with a very plain and not a sensible face , nothing to admire ; but in the other , who was not more than two or three and twenty , they acknowledged considerable beauty ; her features were pretty , and she had a sharp quick eye , and a smartness of air , which though it did not give actual elegance or grace , gave distinction to her person .
The party , like other musical parties , comprehended a great many people who had real taste for the performance , and a great many more who had none at all ; and the performers themselves were , as usual , in their own estimation , and that of their immediate friends , the first private performers in England .
What poor Mrs. Ferrars suffered , when first Fanny broke it to her , is not to be described .
Impatient in this situation to be doing something that might lead to her sister's relief , Elinor resolved to write the next morning to her mother , and hoped by awakening her fears for the health of Marianne , to procure those inquiries which had been so long delayed ; and she was still more eagerly bent on this measure by perceiving after breakfast on the morrow , that Marianne was again writing to Willoughby , for she could not suppose it to be to any other person .
I only wonder that I am alive after what I have suffered for Edward's sake these last four years .
Whether he had asked her pardon for his intrusion on first coming into the room , he could not recollect ; but determining to be on the safe side , he made his apology in form as soon as he could say any thing , after taking a chair .
Elinor's heart was full .
He intends to send his groom into Somersetshire immediately for it , she added , and when it arrives we will ride every day .
It is not fit that he should be living about at his own charge now , at lodgings and taverns .
Lord ! nothing seems to do her any good .
And you , ye well-known trees ! -- but you will continue the same .
But as it was , such a notion had scarcely ever entered her head , except by Mrs. Jennings's suggestion ; and she could not help believing herself the nicest observer of the two :  she watched his eyes , while Mrs. Jennings thought only of his behaviour ; and while his looks of anxious solicitude on Marianne's feeling , in her head and throat , the beginning of a heavy cold , because unexpressed by words , entirely escaped the latter lady's observation , --  she  could discover in them the quick feelings , and needless alarm of a lover .
By whom can you have heard it mentioned ? 
You saw it all ; and was not you quite struck with it ? 
No .
It is now three years ago (she had just reached her fourteenth year ,) that I removed her from school , to place her under the care of a very respectable woman , residing in Dorsetshire , who had the charge of four or five other girls of about the same time of life ; and for two years I had every reason to be pleased with her situation .
The night was cold and stormy .
Lucy looked at Elinor again , and was silent .
But , poor fellow ! it is very fatiguing to him ! for he is forced to make every body like him .
He earnestly pressed her , after giving the particulars of the house and garden , to come with her daughters to Barton Park , the place of his own residence , from whence she might judge , herself , whether Barton Cottage , for the houses were in the same parish , could , by any alteration , be made comfortable to her .
But Sir John would not be satisfied -- the carriage should be sent for them and they must come .
To her dress and appearance she was grown so perfectly indifferent , as not to bestow half the consideration on it , during the whole of her toilet , which it received from Miss Steele in the first five minutes of their being together , when it was finished .
I have only to hope that they may be proportionately short .
Yes ; and heaven knows how much longer we may have to wait .
Have you ever seen the lady ? 
If we  can  but put Willoughby out of her head !
She believed the regard to be mutual ; but she required greater certainty of it to make Marianne's conviction of their attachment agreeable to her .
The Middletons and Palmers -- how am I to bear their pity ? 
Add to which , cried Marianne , that he has neither genius , taste , nor spirit .
Her astonishment at what she heard was at first too great for words ; but at length forcing herself to speak , and to speak cautiously , she said , with calmness of manner , which tolerably well concealed her surprise and solicitude -- May I ask if your engagement is of long standing ? 
After a short silence on both sides , Mrs. Jennings , with all her natural hilarity , burst forth again .
Donavan says there is nothing materially to be apprehended ; her constitution is a good one , and her resolution equal to any thing .
I have erred against every common-place notion of decorum ; I have been open and sincere where I ought to have been reserved , spiritless , dull , and deceitful :  -- had I talked only of the weather and the roads , and had I spoken only once in ten minutes , this reproach would have been spared .
Your wife !
Well , my dear , said Mrs. Jennings , and how did you travel ? 
Of Elinor's distress , she was too busily employed in measuring lengths of worsted for her rug , to see any thing at all ; and calmly continuing her talk , as soon as Marianne disappeared , she said --   Upon my word , I never saw a young woman so desperately in love in my life !
We consulted together , however , as to what should be done , and at last she determined to send for Edward .
He was recalled from wit to wisdom , not by any reproof of her's , but by his own sensibility .
Mrs. Jennings's prophecies , though rather jumbled together , were chiefly fulfilled ; for she was able to visit Edward and his wife in their Parsonage by Michaelmas , and she found in Elinor and her husband , as she really believed , one of the happiest couples in the world .
Willoughby was out of the question .
Mrs. Jennings was a widow with an ample jointure .
Elinor has not my feelings , and therefore she may overlook it , and be happy with him .
A man of whom he had always had such reason to think well !
How she should begin -- how she should express herself in her note to Edward , was now all her concern .
A man who has nothing to do with his own time has no conscience in his intrusion on that of others .
She was perfectly disposed to make every allowance for the colonel's advanced state of life which humanity required .
Are you going back to town ? 
By whom can he have been instigated ? 
La !
About a week after their arrival , it became certain that Willoughby was also arrived .
Now there is no one to regard them .
You shall share its use with me .
I heard from him just before I left Exeter ; taking a letter from her pocket and carelessly showing the direction to Elinor .
Edward could only attempt an explanation by supposing , that , perhaps , at first accidentally meeting , the vanity of the one had been so worked on by the flattery of the other , as to lead by degrees to all the rest .
It was the offer of a small house , on very easy terms , belonging to a relation of her own , a gentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire .
He makes a monstrous deal of money , and they keep their own coach .
Nay , Edward , said Marianne , you need not reproach me .
But , in return , your sister must allow me to feel no more than I profess .
No , my mother is in town .
But every thing was then just settled between Miss Grey and me .
Of his sense and his goodness , continued Elinor , no one can , I think , be in doubt , who has seen him often enough to engage him in unreserved conversation .
What is the amount of his fortune ? 
She was carried out of the room therefore in her mother's arms , in quest of this medicine , and as the two boys chose to follow , though earnestly entreated by their mother to stay behind , the four young ladies were left in a quietness which the room had not known for many hours .
We spent such a day , Edward , in Harley Street yesterday !
The family of Dashwood had long been settled in Sussex .
I hope he will come tonight .
Elinor made her a civil reply , and they walked on for a few minutes in silence .
And do you not think it more likely that she should leave it to her daughters , than to us ? 
So acutely did Mrs. Dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour , and so earnestly did she despise her daughter-in-law for it , that , on the arrival of the latter , she would have quitted the house for ever , had not the entreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflect on the propriety of going , and her own tender love for all her three children determined her afterwards to stay , and for their sakes avoid a breach with their brother .
Business on Sir John's part , and a violent cold on her own , prevented their calling in Berkeley Street .
Elinor smiled , and shook her head .
Dear , dear Norland ! said Marianne , as she wandered alone before the house , on the last evening of their being there ; when shall I cease to regret you ! -- when learn to feel a home elsewhere !
It is not so very likely he should be distressed in his circumstances  now  , for he is a very prudent man , and to be sure must have cleared the estate by this time .
Mrs. Dashwood was sorry for what she had said ; but it gave Elinor pleasure , as it produced a reply from Marianne so expressive of confidence in Willoughby and knowledge of his intentions .
He opened his whole heart to me yesterday as we travelled .
About the middle of the day , Mrs. Jennings went out by herself on business , and Elinor began her letter directly , while Marianne , too restless for employment , too anxious for conversation , walked from one window to the other , or sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation .
What he might say on the subject a twelvemonth after , must be referred to the imagination of husbands and wives .
He declares he won't .
Every thing he said , was clever .
In a short time Elinor saw Willoughby quit the room by the door towards the staircase , and telling Marianne that he was gone , urged the impossibility of speaking to him again that evening , as a fresh argument for her to be calm .
As a friend of mine , of my family , he may , perhaps -- indeed I know he  has  , still greater pleasure in bestowing it ; but , upon my word , you owe nothing to my solicitation .
I suppose it is something he is ashamed of .
Mrs. Dashwood was acting on motives of policy as well as pleasure in the frequency of her visits at Delaford ; for her wish of bringing Marianne and Colonel Brandon together was hardly less earnest , though rather more liberal than what John had expressed .
But does it follow that had he married you , he would have been happy ?  -- The inconveniences would have been different .
I know Marianne's heart  :   I know that she dearly loves me , and that I shall not be the last to whom the affair is made known , when circumstances make the revealment of it eligible .
I am grown very happy ; but that would not interest .
He has seen a great deal of the world ; has been abroad , has read , and has a thinking mind .
Marianne was vexed at it for her sister's sake , and turned her eyes towards Elinor to see how she bore these attacks , with an earnestness which gave Elinor far more pain than could arise from such common-place raillery as Mrs. Jennings's .
No one made any objection but Marianne , who with her usual inattention to the forms of general civility , exclaimed , Your Ladyship will have the goodness to excuse  me  -- you know I detest cards .
A glass of wine , which Elinor procured for her directly , made her more comfortable , and she was at last able to express some sense of her kindness , by saying , Poor Elinor ! how unhappy I make you !
Has not his behaviour to Marianne and to all of us , for at least the last fortnight , declared that he loved and considered her as his future wife , and that he felt for us the attachment of the nearest relation ? 
No , no , no , cried Marianne wildly , he loves you , and only you .
This increased the mirth of the company , and Margaret was eagerly pressed to say something more .
Few people who have so compassionate a heart !
By that time , Marianne was rather better , and her mother leaving her to the care of Margaret and the maid , returned to Elinor , who , though still much disordered , had so far recovered the use of her reason and voice as to be just beginning an inquiry of Thomas , as to the source of his intelligence .
You are quite in the right , replied Elinor calmly .
I do not know , said he , after a pause of expectation on her side , and thoughtfulness on his own , how  you  may have accounted for my behaviour to your sister , or what diabolical motive you may have imputed to me .
As John Dashwood had no more pleasure in music than his eldest sister , his mind was equally at liberty to fix on any thing else ; and a thought struck him during the evening , which he communicated to his wife , for her approbation , when they got home .
The morning was chiefly spent in leaving cards at the houses of Mrs. Jennings's acquaintance to inform them of her being in town ; and Marianne was all the time busy in observing the direction of the wind , watching the variations of the sky and imagining an alteration in the air .
To see Marianne , I felt , would be dreadful , and I even doubted whether I could see her again , and keep to my resolution .
My intentions were not always wrong .
Elinor , who did justice to Mrs. Jennings's kindness , though its effusions were often distressing , and sometimes almost ridiculous , made her those acknowledgments , and returned her those civilities , which her sister could not make or return for herself .
Here is some mistake I am sure -- some dreadful mistake .
Against the interest of her own individual comfort , Mrs. Dashwood had determined that it would be better for Marianne to be any where , at that time , than at Barton , where every thing within her view would be bringing back the past in the strongest and most afflicting manner , by constantly placing Willoughby before her , such as she had always seen him there .
They had not long finished their breakfast before Mrs. Palmer's barouche stopped at the door , and in a few minutes she came laughing into the room :  so delighted to see them all , that it was hard to say whether she received most pleasure from meeting her mother or the Miss Dashwoods again .
From this time the subject was never revived by Elinor , and when entered on by Lucy , who seldom missed an opportunity of introducing it , and was particularly careful to inform her confidante , of her happiness whenever she received a letter from Edward , it was treated by the former with calmness and caution , and dismissed as soon as civility would allow ; for she felt such conversations to be an indulgence which Lucy did not deserve , and which were dangerous to herself .
Or rather , as I believe , she considers them impossible to exist .
But there is one comfort , my dear Miss Marianne -- he is not the only young man in the world worth having ; and with your pretty face you will never want admirers .
And I am sure I should not have the smallest fear of trusting  you  ; indeed , I should be very glad of your advice how to manage in such and uncomfortable situation as I am ; but , however , there is no occasion to trouble  you .
But the family are all rich together .
And what did the Colonel say ? 
She had only two daughters , both of whom she had lived to see respectably married , and she had now therefore nothing to do but to marry all the rest of the world .
My peace of mind is doubly involved in it ; for not only is it horrible to suspect a person , who has been what  he  has been to  me  , of such designs , but what must it make me appear to myself ? 
Nothing could restore him with a faith unbroken -- a character unblemished , to Marianne .
The first question on her side , which led to farther particulars , was --   How long has this been known to you , Elinor ? has he written to you ? 
I am not wishing him too much good , said Marianne at last with a sigh , when I wish his secret reflections may be no more unpleasant than my own .
I never saw you wear a ring before , Edward , she cried .
How surprised you will be , Willoughby , on receiving this ;      and I think you will feel something more than surprise , when      you know that I am in town .
He is , moreover , aware that she  does  disapprove the connection , he dares not therefore at present confess to her his engagement with Marianne , and he feels himself obliged , from his dependent situation , to give into her schemes , and absent himself from Devonshire for a while .
He said so repeatedly ; other things he said too , which marked the turn of his feelings and gave the lie to his actions .
I have had my doubts , I confess ; but they are fainter than they were , and they may soon be entirely done away .
She doubted the sincerity of this assurance no more than he had doubted it himself , and she thought of it for her daughters' sake with satisfaction , though as for herself she was persuaded that a much smaller provision than 7000L would support her in affluence .
It is not to be supposed that any prior attachment on your side -- in short , you know as to an attachment of that kind , it is quite out of the question , the objections are insurmountable -- you have too much sense not to see all that .
Miss Marianne must not expect to have all the men to herself .
Willoughby , where was your heart when you wrote those words ? 
And how you will explain away any part of your guilt in that dreadful business , I confess is beyond my comprehension .
I could get the nicest house in world for you , next door to ours , in Hanover-square .
Neither of them were ever again to be mentioned to Mrs. Ferrars ; and even , if she might hereafter be induced to forgive her son , his wife should never be acknowledged as her daughter , nor be permitted to appear in her presence .
It is a corner room , and has windows on two sides .
The evil is now irremediable , and it has been entirely your own doing .
I am delighted with the plan , she cried , it is exactly what I could wish .
Their mother had nothing , and their father only seven thousand pounds in his own disposal ; for the remaining moiety of his first wife's fortune was also secured to her child , and he had only a life-interest in it .
To attach myself to your sister , therefore , was not a thing to be thought of ; and with a meanness , selfishness , cruelty , which no indignant , no contemptuous look , even of yours , Miss Dashwood , can ever reprobate too much , -- I was acting in this manner , trying to engage her regard , without a thought of returning it .
I am guilty , I confess , of having often wished you to treat our acquaintance in general with greater attention ; but when have I advised you to adopt their sentiments or to conform to their judgment in serious matters ? 
 -- he cried , after hearing what she said -- what could be the Colonel's motive ? 
He stopt a moment for recollection , and then , with another sigh , went on .
Her legal allowance was not adequate to her fortune , nor sufficient for her comfortable maintenance , and I learnt from my brother that the power of receiving it had been made over some months before to another person .
A thousand inquiries sprung up from her heart , but she dared not urge one .
Mrs. Jennings , who had watched them with pleasure while they were talking , and who expected to see the effect of Miss Dashwood's communication , in such an instantaneous gaiety on Colonel Brandon's side , as might have become a man in the bloom of youth , of hope and happiness , saw him , with amazement , remain the whole evening more serious and thoughtful than usual .
That is exactly what I think of him , cried Marianne .
If I had my senses about me I might have called in Conduit Street in my way home , and told them of it .
As it was impossible , however , now to prevent their coming , Lady Middleton resigned herself to the idea of it , with all the philosophy of a well-bred woman , contenting herself with merely giving her husband a gentle reprimand on the subject five or six times every day .
Mrs. Jennings was not struck by the same thought ; for soon after his entrance , she walked across the room to the tea-table where Elinor presided , and whispered , The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see .
He rose from his seat , and walked to the window , apparently from not knowing what to do ; took up a pair of scissors that lay there , and while spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting the latter to pieces as he spoke , said , in a hurried voice --   Perhaps you do not know -- you may not have heard that my brother is lately married to -- to the youngest -- to Miss Lucy Steele .
But while the imaginations of other people will carry them away to form wrong judgments of our conduct , and to decide on it by slight appearances , one's happiness must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance .
As soon as they were out of the house , his enquiries began .
No , indeed ! replied her cousin , with affected earnestness , and I beg you will contradict it , if you ever hear it talked of .
I felt that she was infinitely dearer to me than any other woman in the world , and that I was using her infamously .
Well , then , I know who it is from , Colonel .
She would not allow the presence of Lucy , nor the consciousness of some injustice towards herself , to deter her from saying that she was happy to see him , and that she had very much regretted being from home , when he called before in Berkeley Street .
But though  she  never spoke of it out of her own family , Elinor could see its influence on her mind , in the something like confusion of countenance with which she entered , and an attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to herself .
Elinor saw , with great uneasiness the low spirits of her friend .
Such advances towards heroism in her sister , made Elinor feel equal to any thing herself .
The complaints and lamentations which politeness had hitherto restrained , now burst forth universally ; and they all agreed again and again how provoking it was to be so disappointed .
Strange that it would ! cried Marianne .
Edward is very amiable , and I love him tenderly .
You are mistaken , Elinor , said she warmly , in supposing I know very little of Willoughby .
Marianne seemed much struck .
Know your own happiness .
Perhaps you might notice the ring when you saw him ? 
It has been involuntary , and I will not encourage it .
Well , poor thing !
I cannot go into Somersetshire .
However , you will think of all that at your leisure .
Oh ! he must and shall come back , cried Sir John .
Shall you be in town this winter , Miss Dashwood ? said she with all her accustomary complacency .
The Colonel , though disclaiming all pretensions to connoisseurship , warmly admired the screens , as he would have done any thing painted by Miss Dashwood ; and on the curiosity of the others being of course excited , they were handed round for general inspection .
I confess , replied Elinor , that every circumstance except  one  is in favour of their engagement ; but that  one  is the total silence of both on the subject , and with me it almost outweighs every other .
Who can this be ? cried Elinor .
And then I have made a little purchase within this half year ; East Kingham Farm , you must remember the place , where old Gibson used to live .
His visit afforded her but a very partial satisfaction , while his own enjoyment in it appeared so imperfect .
That is true , cried Marianne , in a cheerful voice , and walking to the window as she spoke , to examine the day .
Reflection had given calmness to her judgment , and sobered her own opinion of Willoughby's deserts ; she wished , therefore , to declare only the simple truth , and lay open such facts as were really due to his character , without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the fancy astray .
Willoughby could not hear of her marriage without a pang ; and his punishment was soon afterwards complete in the voluntary forgiveness of Mrs. Smith , who , by stating his marriage with a woman of character , as the source of her clemency , gave him reason for believing that had he behaved with honour towards Marianne , he might at once have been happy and rich .
From Cleveland , which was within a few miles of Bristol , the distance to Barton was not beyond one day , though a long day's journey ; and their mother's servant might easily come there to attend them down ; and as there could be no occasion of their staying above a week at Cleveland , they might now be at home in little more than three weeks' time .
Elinor needed little observation to perceive that her reserve was a mere calmness of manner with which sense had nothing to do .
Lady Middleton had sent a very civil message by him , denoting her intention of waiting on Mrs. Dashwood as soon as she could be assured that her visit would be no inconvenience ; and as this message was answered by an invitation equally polite , her ladyship was introduced to them the next day .
Mrs. Smith had somehow or other been informed , I imagine by some distant relation , whose interest it was to deprive me of her favour , of an affair , a connection -- but I need not explain myself farther , he added , looking at her with an heightened colour and an enquiring eye , -- your particular intimacy -- you have probably heard the whole story long ago .
How charming it will be , said Charlotte , when he is in Parliament ! -- won't it ? 
Thus a circumstance occurred , while the sisters were together in their own room after breakfast , which sunk the heart of Mrs. Jennings still lower in her estimation ; because , through her own weakness , it chanced to prove a source of fresh pain to herself , though Mrs. Jennings was governed in it by an impulse of the utmost good-will .
Elinor wanted very much to know , though she did not choose to ask , whether Edward was then in town ; but nothing would have induced Fanny voluntarily to mention his name before her , till able to tell her that his marriage with Miss Morton was resolved on , or till her husband's expectations on Colonel Brandon were answered ; because she believed them still so very much attached to each other , that they could not be too sedulously divided in word and deed on every occasion .
His own merits must soon secure it .
You have said so , replied Elinor , almost every day since they first met on High-church Down ; and they had not known each other a week , I believe , before you were certain that Marianne wore his picture round her neck ; but it turned out to be only the miniature of our great uncle .
How can you ?  -- But the time will come I hope -- I am sure you will like him .
No taste for drawing ! replied Elinor , why should you think so  ?  
Mr. Palmer looked up on her entering the room , stared at her some minutes , and then returned to his newspaper .
The carriage was at the door ready to take my poor cousins away , and they were just stepping in as he came off ; poor Lucy in such a condition , he says , she could hardly walk ; and Nancy , she was almost as bad .
I think I have , replied Elinor , with an exertion of spirits , which increased with her increase of emotion .
And had you a great many smart beaux there ? 
The original was all her own -- her own happy thoughts and gentle diction .
So there I have the whip hand of you .
I felt myself , she added , to be as solemnly engaged to him , as if the strictest legal covenant had bound us to each other .
Marianne was astonished to find how much the imagination of her mother and herself had outstripped the truth .
Oh , cried Miss Steele , looking significantly round at them , I dare say Lucy's beau is quite as modest and pretty behaved as Miss Dashwood's .
He then really thought himself equal to it .
Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism ?  and is not that the commonest infirmity of declining life ? 
Elinor lost no time in bringing her business forward , was on the point of concluding it , when another gentleman presented himself at her side .
I long to inquire ; and how will  my  interference be borne .
I cannot be forced into genius and eloquence .
She had already repeated her own history to Elinor three or four times ; and had Elinor's memory been equal to her means of improvement , she might have known very early in their acquaintance all the particulars of Mr. Jennings's last illness , and what he said to his wife a few minutes before he died .
No .
It must be terrible for you to hear it talked of ; and as for your sister , I am sure I would not mention a word about it to her for the world .
Elinor confirmed it .
I  will  be more collected -- more concise .
Why would you be persuaded by my uncle , Sir Robert , against your own judgment , to place Edward under private tuition , at the most critical time of his life ? 
The idea of Edward's being a clergyman , and living in a small parsonage-house , diverted him beyond measure ; -- and when to that was added the fanciful imagery of Edward reading prayers in a white surplice , and publishing the banns of marriage between John Smith and Mary Brown , he could conceive nothing more ridiculous .
How odd , indeed ! repeated Elinor within herself , regarding her sister with uneasiness .
Her manners were by no means so elegant as her sister's , but they were much more prepossessing .
I might have sold it again , the next day , for more than I gave :  but , with regard to the purchase-money , I might have been very unfortunate indeed ; for the stocks were at that time so low , that if I had not happened to have the necessary sum in my banker's hands , I must have sold out to very great loss .
Anxiety and hope now oppressed her in equal degrees , and left her no moment of tranquillity till the arrival of Mr. Harris at four o'clock ; when his assurances , his felicitations on a recovery in her sister even surpassing his expectation , gave her confidence , comfort , and tears of joy .
Yes , Marianne , even in a man between thirty and forty .
He could only obtain a promise of their calling at the Park within a day or two , and then left them in amazement at their indifference , to walk home and boast anew of their attractions to the Miss Steeles , as he had been already boasting of the Miss Steeles to them .
With an income quite sufficient to their wants thus secured to them , they had nothing to wait for after Edward was in possession of the living , but the readiness of the house , to which Colonel Brandon , with an eager desire for the accommodation of Elinor , was making considerable improvements ; and after waiting some time for their completion , after experiencing , as usual , a thousand disappointments and delays from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workmen , Elinor , as usual , broke through the first positive resolution of not marrying till every thing was ready , and the ceremony took place in Barton church early in the autumn .
Poor souls !
I should be sorry to have  you  ill ; you , that have been the greatest comfort to me in the world ! -- Heaven knows what I should have done without your friendship .
 You  are my cousins , and they are my wife's , so you must be related .
Mr. Harris was punctual in his second visit ; but he came to be disappointed in his hopes of what the last would produce .
You are very wrong , Mr. Willoughby , very blamable , said Elinor , while her voice , in spite of herself , betrayed her compassionate emotion ; you ought not to speak in this way , either of Mrs. Willoughby or my sister .
Harry was vastly pleased .
Ferrars ! repeated Miss Steele ; Mr. Ferrars is the happy man , is he ? 
The old well-established grievance of duty against will , parent against child , was the cause of all .
But though Mrs. Ferrars  did  come to see them , and always treated them with the make-believe of decent affection , they were never insulted by her real favour and preference .
The shortness of his visit , the steadiness of his purpose in leaving them , originated in the same fettered inclination , the same inevitable necessity of temporizing with his mother .
The house was handsome , and handsomely fitted up , and the young ladies were immediately put in possession of a very comfortable apartment .
I am glad of it with all my heart ; but really you did not look it .
She was determined to drop his acquaintance immediately , and she was very thankful that she had never been acquainted with him at all .
Pray be quick , sir , said Elinor , impatiently ; I have no time to spare .
And yet I do assure you , replied Lucy , her little sharp eyes full of meaning , there seemed to me to be a coldness and displeasure in your manner that made me quite uncomfortable .
Elinor paid her every quiet and unobtrusive attention in her power ; and she would have tried to sooth and tranquilize her still more , had not Marianne entreated her , with all the eagerness of the most nervous irritability , not to speak to her for the world .
To take three thousand pounds from the fortune of their dear little boy would be impoverishing him to the most dreadful degree .
Marianne hardly knew what to say .
I cannot afford to lose  one  hour .
I acquit Edward of essential misconduct .
But they learnt , on enquiry , that its possessor , an elderly lady of very good character , was unfortunately too infirm to mix with the world , and never stirred from home .
I shall now live solely for my family .
Because he believes many people pretend to more admiration of the beauties of nature than they really feel , and is disgusted with such pretensions , he affects greater indifference and less discrimination in viewing them himself than he possesses .
Ay , if we can do that , Ma'am , said Elinor , we shall do very well with or without Colonel Brandon .
Wherever they went , she was evidently always on the watch .
Well , my dear , tis a true saying about an ill wind , for it will be all the better for Colonel Brandon .
I am sure you think me very strange , for enquiring about her in such a way , said Lucy , eyeing Elinor attentively as she spoke ; but perhaps there may be reasons -- I wish I might venture ; but however I hope you will do me the justice of believing that I do not mean to be impertinent .
I am so glad to see you ! said she , seating herself between Elinor and Marianne , for it is so bad a day I was afraid you might not come , which would be a shocking thing , as we go away again tomorrow .
She saw only that he was quiet and unobtrusive , and she liked him for it .
Elinor gloried in his integrity ; and Marianne forgave all his offences in compassion for his punishment .
I have      passed a wretched night in endeavouring to excuse a conduct      which can scarcely be called less than insulting ; but though      I have not yet been able to form any reasonable apology for      your behaviour , I am perfectly ready to hear your      justification of it .
How does Charlotte do ? 
As for the navy , it had fashion on its side , but I was too old when the subject was first started to enter it ; and , at length , as there was no necessity for my having any profession at all , as I might be as dashing and expensive without a red coat on my back as with one , idleness was pronounced on the whole to be most advantageous and honourable , and a young man of eighteen is not in general so earnestly bent on being busy as to resist the solicitations of his friends to do nothing .
He has told me so himself .
But at first I must confess , my vanity only was elevated by it .
Mrs. Jennings directly gave her the gratifying assurance that she certainly would  not  , and Miss Steele was made completely happy .
Has there been any inconsistency on his side to create alarm ? can he be deceitful ? 
That is what I like ; that is what a young man ought to be .
The cruelty , the impolitic cruelty , -- he replied , with great feeling , -- of dividing , or attempting to divide , two young people long attached to each other , is terrible .
Sure somebody else might be found that would do as well ; somebody that is in orders already .
Edward has drawn his own lot , and I fear it will be a bad one .
But we are not all born , you know , with the same powers , -- the same address .
That the hair was her own , she instantaneously felt as well satisfied as Marianne ; the only difference in their conclusions was , that what Marianne considered as a free gift from her sister , Elinor was conscious must have been procured by some theft or contrivance unknown to herself .
Elinor assured him that she did ; -- that she forgave , pitied , wished him well -- was even interested in his happiness -- and added some gentle counsel as to the behaviour most likely to promote it .
His fortune too ! -- for at my time of life you know , everybody cares about  that  ; -- and though I neither know nor desire to know , what it really is , I am sure it must be a good one .
His want of spirits , of openness , and of consistency , were most usually attributed to his want of independence , and his better knowledge of Mrs. Ferrars's disposition and designs .
You are very right in supposing how my money would be spent ; some of it , at least -- my loose cash -- would certainly be employed in improving my collection of music and books .
I remember her aunt very well , Biddy Henshawe ; she married a very wealthy man .
Their dress was very smart , their manners very civil , they were delighted with the house , and in raptures with the furniture , and they happened to be so doatingly fond of children that Lady Middleton's good opinion was engaged in their favour before they had been an hour at the Park .
She gave him a brief reply .
A few minutes more of silent exertion enabled him to proceed with composure .
Elinor's heart could easily account for his not putting himself forward ; and Mrs. Dashwood probably found the same explanation .
Sir John was loud in his admiration at the end of every song , and as loud in his conversation with the others while every song lasted .
Eager to save her mother from every unnecessary moment's horrible suspense , she ran immediately into the hall , and reached the outward door just in time to receive and support her as she entered it .
Had he  not  told me as an inducement that you and your sister were to be there , I should have felt it too certain a thing , to trust myself near him .
He and I had a great deal of talk about it ; and the best of all is , that he is gone back again to Harley Street , that he may be within call when Mrs. Ferrars is told of it , for she was sent for as soon as ever my cousins left the house , for your sister was sure  she  would be in hysterics too ; and so she may , for what I care .
When does she try to avoid society , or appear restless and dissatisfied in it ? 
I wish him very happy ; and I am so sure of his always doing his duty , that though now he may harbour some regret , in the end he must become so .
I would lay any wager it is about Miss Williams .
Colonel Brandon's character , said Elinor , as an excellent man , is well established .
His name was good , his residence was in their favourite village , and she soon found out that of all manly dresses a shooting-jacket was the most becoming .
But his coming for me as he did , with such active , such ready friendship , is enough to prove him one of the worthiest of men .
You wrong her exceedingly .
 One  person I was sure would represent me as capable of any thing .
It was my father's last request to me , replied her husband , that I should assist his widow and daughters .
And where are your sisters ? 
I have had such a time of it !
Poor young man ! -- and what is to become of him ? 
Elinor , affected by his relation , and still more by his distress , could not speak .
Upon my soul , he added , I believe it is nothing more ; and so I often tell my mother , when she is grieving about it .
The furniture was all sent around by water .
I shall very soon think him handsome , Elinor , if I do not now .
Thunderbolts and daggers ! what a reproof would she have given me ! her taste , her opinions -- I believe they are better known to me than my own , and I am sure they are dearer .
She walked eagerly on as she spoke ; and Elinor , to screen Marianne from particularity , as she felt almost certain of its not being Willoughby , quickened her pace and kept up with her .
But he did not ask for hope or encouragement .
As soon , however , as the consciousness of all this was forced by continual repetition on Marianne , she could stay no longer .
Marianne is not well , said she .
Lady Middleton was equally pleased with Mrs. Dashwood .
How long it had been carrying on between them , however , he was equally at a loss with herself to make out ; for at Oxford , where he had remained for choice ever since his quitting London , he had had no means of hearing of her but from herself , and her letters to the very last were neither less frequent , nor less affectionate than usual .
I believe , she added in a low voice , he would have been very glad to have had me , if he could .
It is very right that you  should  go to town ; I would have every young woman of your condition in life acquainted with the manners and amusements of London .
You have already ascertained Mr. Willoughby's opinion in almost every matter of importance .
Elinor placed all that was astonishing in this way of acting to his mother's account ; and it was happy for her that he had a mother whose character was so imperfectly known to her , as to be the general excuse for every thing strange on the part of her son .
Like half the rest of the world , if more than half there be that are clever and good , Marianne , with excellent abilities and an excellent disposition , was neither reasonable nor candid .
It was quite a sudden thing our coming at all , and I knew nothing of it till the carriage was coming to the door , and then Mr. Palmer asked me if I would go with him to Barton .
Elinor was grateful for the attention , but it could not alter her design ; and their mother's concurrence being readily gained , every thing relative to their return was arranged as far as it could be ; -- and Marianne found some relief in drawing up a statement of the hours that were yet to divide her from Barton .
This only need be said ; -- that when they all sat down to table at four o'clock , about three hours after his arrival , he had secured his lady , engaged her mother's consent , and was not only in the rapturous profession of the lover , but , in the reality of reason and truth , one of the happiest of men .
For their brother's sake , too , for the sake of his own heart , she rejoiced ; and she reproached herself for being unjust to his merit before , in believing him incapable of generosity .
Marianne had already sent to say , that she should eat nothing more .
But still I might not have believed it , for where the mind is perhaps rather unwilling to be convinced , it will always find something to support its doubts , if I had not , when the servant let me in today , accidentally seen a letter in his hand , directed to Mr. Willoughby in your sister's writing .
The old walnut trees are all come down to make room for it .
Your sister , said he , with abruptness , a moment afterwards -- is out of danger .
Good God ! cried Marianne , he has been here while we were out .
He must and does love her I am sure .
How soon he had walked himself into the proper resolution , however , how soon an opportunity of exercising it occurred , in what manner he expressed himself , and how he was received , need not be particularly told .
Marianne's pianoforte was unpacked and properly disposed of ; and Elinor's drawings were affixed to the walls of their sitting room .
But I will not      suppose this possible , and I hope very soon to receive your      personal assurance of its being otherwise .
Willoughby , he , whom only half an hour ago she had abhorred as the most worthless of men , Willoughby , in spite of all his faults , excited a degree of commiseration for the sufferings produced by them , which made her think of him as now separated for ever from her family , with a tenderness , a regret , rather in proportion , as she soon acknowledged within herself -- to his wishes than to his merits .
They were lucky enough to find Lady Middleton at home , and Sir John came in before their visit ended .
A fortnight ! she repeated , surprised at his being so long in the same county with Elinor without seeing her before .
I do not know whether you have ever happened to see any of her performances before , but she is in general reckoned to draw extremely well .
With such a knowledge as this , it was impossible for Elinor to feel easy on the subject .
However , I shan't say anything against them to  you  ; and to be sure they did send us home in their own chariot , which was more than I looked for .
Without shutting herself up from her family , or leaving the house in determined solitude to avoid them , or lying awake the whole night to indulge meditation , Elinor found every day afforded her leisure enough to think of Edward , and of Edward's behaviour , in every possible variety which the different state of her spirits at different times could produce , -- with tenderness , pity , approbation , censure , and doubt .
Had they told me , he cried with vehemence , that Mr. Palmer and all his relations were at the devil , it would not have turned me from the door .
She thanked him with brief , though fervent gratitude , and while he went to hurry off his servant with a message to Mr. Harris , and an order for post-horses directly , she wrote a few lines to her mother .
What magnificent orders would travel from this family to London , said Edward , in such an event !
It was enough to secure his good opinion ; for to be unaffected was all that a pretty girl could want to make her mind as captivating as her person .
Towards her husband and mother she was the same as to them ; and intimacy was therefore neither to be looked for nor desired .
But there was no peculiar disgrace in this ; for it was very much the case with the chief of their visitors , who almost all laboured under one or other of these disqualifications for being agreeable -- Want of sense , either natural or improved -- want of elegance -- want of spirits -- or want of temper .
His name , he replied , was Willoughby , and his present home was at Allenham , from whence he hoped she would allow him the honour of calling tomorrow to enquire after Miss Dashwood .
I have no such scruples , and I am sure I could put up with every unpleasantness of that kind with very little effort .
After a visit on Colonel Brandon's side of only three or four days , the two gentlemen quitted Barton together .
Elinor , distressed by this charge of reserve in herself , which she was not at liberty to do away , knew not how , under such circumstances , to press for greater openness in Marianne .
The kindness , the unceasing kindness of Mrs. Jennings , I had repaid with ungrateful contempt .
I hope you will be a great deal at Combe Magna .
Lucy was silenced .
Your uncle !
Of their personal charms he had not required a second interview to be convinced .
They walked up stairs in to the drawing-room .
But it  was  said , I know , very well , and by more than one ; for Miss Godby told Miss Sparks , that nobody in their senses could expect Mr. Ferrars to give up a woman like Miss Morton , with thirty thousand pounds to her fortune , for Lucy Steele that had nothing at all ; and I had it from Miss Sparks myself .
Elinor , without observing the varying complexion of her sister , and the animated look which spoke no indifference to the plan , immediately gave a grateful but absolute denial for both , in which she believed herself to be speaking their united inclinations .
She found him , however , perfectly the gentleman in his behaviour to all his visitors , and only occasionally rude to his wife and her mother ; she found him very capable of being a pleasant companion , and only prevented from being so always , by too great an aptitude to fancy himself as much superior to people in general , as he must feel himself to be to Mrs. Jennings and Charlotte .
I am persuaded that Mrs. Smith suspects his regard for Marianne , disapproves of it , (perhaps because she has other views for him ,) and on that account is eager to get him away ; and that the business which she sends him off to transact is invented as an excuse to dismiss him .
As this was a favourite meal with Mrs. Jennings , it lasted a considerable time , and they were just setting themselves , after it , round the common working table , when a letter was delivered to Marianne , which she eagerly caught from the servant , and , turning of a death-like paleness , instantly ran out of the room .
I cannot suppose it possible that she should .
But if there should by any chance happen to be a woman who is single at seven and twenty , I should not think Colonel Brandon's being thirty-five any objection to his marrying  her   .
But they are Lady Middleton's visitors .
You mean to go to Delaford after them I suppose , said Elinor , with a faint smile .
Such a noble mind ! such openness , such sincerity !
Their manners were particularly civil , and Elinor soon allowed them credit for some kind of sense , when she saw with what constant and judicious attention they were making themselves agreeable to Lady Middleton .
The assistance he thought of , I dare say , was only such as might be reasonably expected of you ; for instance , such as looking out for a comfortable small house for them , helping them to move their things , and sending them presents of fish and game , and so forth , whenever they are in season .
Mrs. Jennings received the refusal with some surprise , and repeated her invitation immediately .
He hoped they would all excuse the smallness of the party , and could assure them it should never happen so again .
Indeed a man could not very well be in love with either of her daughters , without extending the passion to her ; and Elinor had the satisfaction of seeing him soon become more like himself .
She is walking , I believe .
He had met Mrs. Jennings at the door in her way to the carriage , as he came to leave his farewell card ; and she , after apologising for not returning herself , had obliged him to enter , by saying that Miss Dashwood was above , and wanted to speak with him on very particular business .
His attentive behaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her that their welfare was dear to him , and , for a long time , she firmly relied on the liberality of his intentions .
And not a creature knowing a syllable of the matter , except Nancy !
Marianne's indignation burst forth as soon as he quitted the room ; and as her vehemence made reserve impossible in Elinor , and unnecessary in Mrs. Jennings , they all joined in a very spirited critique upon the party .
Remember , Elinor , said she , how very often Sir John fetches our letters himself from the post , and carries them to it .
On their return from the park they found Willoughby's curricle and servant in waiting at the cottage , and Mrs. Dashwood was convinced that her conjecture had been just .
In such employments as these they were interrupted soon after breakfast the next day by the entrance of their landlord , who called to welcome them to Barton , and to offer them every accommodation from his own house and garden in which theirs might at present be deficient .
This , as every thing else would have been , was too much for Marianne , who could only exclaim , in the anguish of her heart , Oh !
The dinner was a grand one , the servants were numerous , and every thing bespoke the Mistress's inclination for show , and the Master's ability to support it .
The whole country about them abounded in beautiful walks .
And as to the house being a bad one , I do not know what the Colonel would be at , for it is as good a one as ever I saw .
No , ma'am , for my mistress .
It implies everything amiable .
In some surprise at the familiarity of this question , or at least of the manner in which it was spoken , Elinor replied that she was .
Upon my word , replied Elinor , I cannot tell you , for I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of the word .
Her inviting you to town is certainly a vast thing in your favour ; and indeed , it speaks altogether so great a regard for you , that in all probability when she dies you will not be forgotten .
No ; my feelings are not often shared , not often understood .
That is very true , and , therefore , I do not know whether , upon the whole , it would not be more advisable to do something for their mother while she lives , rather than for them  --  something of the annuity kind I mean .
Oh ! that would be terrible , indeed , said Miss Steele .
To my fancy , a thousand times prettier than Barton Park , where they are forced to send three miles for their meat , and have not a neighbour nearer than your mother .
As soon as they left the dining-room , Elinor enquired of her about it ; and great was her surprise when she found that every circumstance related by Mrs. Jennings was perfectly true .
Miss Dashwood , do you think people make love when any body else is by ? 
My promise to Lucy , obliged me to be secret .
My affection for Marianne , my thorough conviction of her attachment to me -- it was all insufficient to outweigh that dread of poverty , or get the better of those false ideas of the necessity of riches , which I was naturally inclined to feel , and expensive society had increased .
Some letters had passed between her and her brother , in consequence of Marianne's illness ; and in the first of John's , there had been this sentence :  -- We know nothing of our unfortunate Edward , and can make no enquiries on so prohibited a subject , but conclude him to be still at Oxford ; which was all the intelligence of Edward afforded her by the correspondence , for his name was not even mentioned in any of the succeeding letters .
I do not know what I told her , he replied , impatiently ; less than was due to the past , beyond a doubt , and in all likelihood much more than was justified by the future .
Elinor said no more , and John was also for a short time silent .
Though her late conversation with her daughter-in-law had made her resolve on remaining at Norland no longer than was unavoidable , it had not produced the smallest effect on her in that point to which it principally tended .
Affecting that air of playfulness , therefore , which is delightful in a woman one loves , she opened the letter directly , and read its contents .
An annuity is a very serious business ; it comes over and over every year , and there is no getting rid of it .
Their journey was safely performed .
Lady Middleton piqued herself upon the elegance of her table , and of all her domestic arrangements ; and from this kind of vanity was her greatest enjoyment in any of their parties .
But farther than this you must not believe .
They will have no carriage , no horses , and hardly any servants ; they will keep no company , and can have no expenses of any kind !
In a few minutes , however , Marianne was recovered enough to put an end to the bustle , and sit down among the rest ; though her spirits retained the impression of what had passed , the whole evening .
Short was the time , however , in which that fear could affect her , for within half an hour after Willoughby's leaving the house , she was again called down stairs by the sound of another carriage .
Mrs. Palmer had her child , and Mrs. Jennings her carpet-work ; they talked of the friends they had left behind , arranged Lady Middleton's engagements , and wondered whether Mr. Palmer and Colonel Brandon would get farther than Reading that night .
Mrs. John Dashwood now installed herself mistress of Norland ; and her mother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors .
Mr. and Mrs. Palmer were of the party ; from the former , whom they had not seen before since their arrival in town , as he was careful to avoid the appearance of any attention to his mother-in-law , and therefore never came near her , they received no mark of recognition on their entrance .
Sometimes one is guided by what they say of themselves , and very frequently by what other people say of them , without giving oneself time to deliberate and judge .
But it is not to be imagined that she lives up to her income .
Marianne was , of course , kept in ignorance of all these arrangements .
Fifteen years ! my dear Fanny ; her life cannot be worth half that purchase .
I thought you were both in Devonshire , said he .
It was contrary to every doctrine of her's that difference of fortune should keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance of disposition ; and that Elinor's merit should not be acknowledged by every one who knew her , was to her comprehension impossible .
One shoulder of mutton , you know , drives another down .
Elinor resolving to exert herself , though fearing the sound of her own voice , now said --   Is Mrs. Ferrars at Longstaple ? 
Concealing it from us ! my dear child , do you accuse Willoughby and Marianne of concealment ? 
Mrs. Dashwood's and Elinor's appetites were equally lost , and Margaret might think herself very well off , that with so much uneasiness as both her sisters had lately experienced , so much reason as they had often had to be careless of their meals , she had never been obliged to go without her dinner before .
His father was rendered easy by such an assurance , and Mr. John Dashwood had then leisure to consider how much there might prudently be in his power to do for them .
Though aware , before she began it , that it must bring a confession of his inconstancy , and confirm their separation for ever , she was not aware that such language could be suffered to announce it ; nor could she have supposed Willoughby capable of departing so far from the appearance of every honourable and delicate feeling -- so far from the common decorum of a gentleman , as to send a letter so impudently cruel :  a letter which , instead of bringing with his desire of a release any professions of regret , acknowledged no breach of faith , denied all peculiar affection whatever ; -- a letter of which every line was an insult , and which proclaimed its writer to be deep in hardened villainy .
If you could be supposed to be biased in any respect by your own feelings , your opinion would not be worth having .
Are you quite sure of it ? she replied .
You will tell me , I know , that this may or may  not  have happened ; but I will listen to no cavil , unless you can point out any other method of understanding the affair as satisfactory at this .
Abundance of civilities passed on all sides .
Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a third person , and Elinor withdrew to think it all over in private , to wish success to her friend , and yet in wishing it , to feel a pang for Willoughby .
As the Miss Dashwoods entered the drawing-room of the park the next day , at one door , Mrs. Palmer came running in at the other , looking as good humoured and merry as before .
I cannot agree with you there , said Elinor .
Cleveland !
It was an unaccountable business .
Marianne was silent ; it was impossible for her to say what she did not feel , however trivial the occasion ; and upon Elinor therefore the whole task of telling lies when politeness required it , always fell .
These parlors are both too small for such parties of our friends as I hope to see often collected here ; and I have some thoughts of throwing the passage into one of them with perhaps a part of the other , and so leave the remainder of that other for an entrance ; this , with a new drawing room which may be easily added , and a bed-chamber and garret above , will make it a very snug little cottage .
The former was for Sir John's gratification , the latter for that of his lady .
I have seen Mr. Ferrars two or three times in Harley Street , and am much pleased with him .
A great deal too handsome , in my opinion , for any place  they  can ever afford to live in .
We have had great trials , and      great persecutions , but however , at the same time ,      gratefully acknowledge many friends , yourself not the least      among them , whose great kindness I shall always thankfully      remember , as will Edward too , who I have told of it .
With the assistance of his mother-in-law , Sir John was not long in discovering that the name of Ferrars began with an F. and this prepared a future mine of raillery against the devoted Elinor , which nothing but the newness of their acquaintance with Edward could have prevented from being immediately sprung .
I declare they are quite charming ; I could look at them for ever .
Mr. Palmer took no notice of her .
He addressed her with easy civility , and twisted his head into a bow which assured her as plainly as words could have done , that he was exactly the coxcomb she had heard him described to be by Lucy .
If , however , I am allowed to think that you and yours feel an interest in my fate and actions , it may be the means -- it may put me on my guard -- at least , it may be something to live for .
For Marianne , however , in spite of his incivility in surviving her loss , he always retained that decided regard which interested him in every thing that befell her , and made her his secret standard of perfection in woman ; and many a rising beauty would be slighted by him in after-days as bearing no comparison with Mrs. Brandon .
Elinor perfectly understood her , and was forced to use all her self-command to make it appear that she did  not .
At last , however , my resolution was taken , and I had determined , as soon as I could engage her alone , to justify the attentions I had so invariably paid her , and openly assure her of an affection which I had already taken such pains to display .
It was a great satisfaction to us to hear it , I assure you .
She could not but smile to see the graciousness of both mother and daughter towards the very person -- for Lucy was particularly distinguished -- whom of all others , had they known as much as she did , they would have been most anxious to mortify ; while she herself , who had comparatively no power to wound them , sat pointedly slighted by both .
I came only for Willoughby's sake -- and now who cares for me ? 
The Palmers were to remove to Cleveland about the end of March , for the Easter holidays ; and Mrs. Jennings , with both her friends , received a very warm invitation from Charlotte to go with them .
How attentive she is , to think of every body ! -- Thank you , my dear , for showing it me .
Then , and then only , under such a roof , I might perhaps be as happy at Combe as I have been at Barton .
Marianne looked at her steadily , and said , You know , Elinor , that this is a kind of talking which I cannot bear .
We measured the dining-room , and found it would hold exactly eighteen couple , and the affair was arranged precisely after my plan .
John Dashwood was greatly astonished ; but his nature was calm , not open to provocation , and he never wished to offend anybody , especially anybody of good fortune .
Mrs. Jennings came immediately to their room on her return , and without waiting to have her request of admittance answered , opened the door and walked in with a look of real concern .
She had seen enough of her pride , her meanness , and her determined prejudice against herself , to comprehend all the difficulties that must have perplexed the engagement , and retarded the marriage , of Edward and herself , had he been otherwise free ; -- and she had seen almost enough to be thankful for her  own  sake , that one greater obstacle preserved her from suffering under any other of Mrs. Ferrars's creation , preserved her from all dependence upon her caprice , or any solicitude for her good opinion .
Brandon will be jealous , if she does not take care .
It has been , and is , and probably will always be a heavy misfortune to me , that I have had no necessary business to engage me , no profession to give me employment , or afford me any thing like independence .
I do assure you , he replied , that I have long thought on this point , as you think now .
Perhaps , then , he hesitatingly replied , what I heard this morning may be -- there may be more truth in it than I could believe possible at first .
From this moment her mind was never quiet ; the expectation of seeing him every hour of the day , made her unfit for any thing .
And if they really  do  interest themselves , said Marianne , in her new character of candour , in bringing about a reconciliation , I shall think that even John and Fanny are not entirely without merit .
A dance ! cried Marianne .
I cannot help thinking , in short , that means might have been found .
Who regards me ? 
Tell me honestly , -- a deeper glow overspreading his cheeks , do you think me most a knave or a fool ? 
Marianne's abilities were , in many respects , quite equal to Elinor's .
Her smile however changed to a sigh when she remembered that promise to Willoughby was yet unfulfilled , and feared she had that to communicate which might again unsettle the mind of Marianne , and ruin at least for a time this fair prospect of busy tranquillity .
It was thus imparted to her , as soon as any opportunity of private conference between them occurred .
You  can  have no grief .
But Charlotte , she would not be satisfied , so Mr. Donavan was sent for ; and luckily he happened to just come in from Harley Street , so he stepped over directly , and as soon as ever he saw the child , he said just as we did , that it was nothing in the world but the red gum , and then Charlotte was easy .
In Bond Street especially , where much of their business lay , her eyes were in constant inquiry ; and in whatever shop the party were engaged , her mind was equally abstracted from every thing actually before them , from all that interested and occupied the others .
Other designs might afterward arise .
That good lady , however , saw only that Marianne had received a letter from Willoughby , which appeared to her a very good joke , and which she treated accordingly , by hoping , with a laugh , that she would find it to her liking .
What the devil does Sir John mean by not having a billiard room in his house ? 
She , who had seen her week after week so constantly suffering , oppressed by anguish of heart which she had neither courage to speak of , nor fortitude to conceal , now saw with a joy , which no other could equally share , an apparent composure of mind , which , in being the result as she trusted of serious reflection , must eventually lead her to contentment and cheerfulness .
 Your  competence and  my  wealth are very much alike , I dare say ; and without them , as the world goes now , we shall both agree that every kind of external comfort must be wanting .
The letter F had been likewise invariably brought forward , and found productive of such countless jokes , that its character as the wittiest letter in the alphabet had been long established with Elinor .
Marianne severely censured herself for what she had said ; but her own forgiveness might have been more speedy , had she known how little offence it had given her sister .
You would rob it of its simplicity by imaginary improvement ! and this dear parlour in which our acquaintance first began , and in which so many happy hours have been since spent by us together , you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance , and every body would be eager to pass through the room which has hitherto contained within itself more real accommodation and comfort than any other apartment of the handsomest dimensions in the world could possibly afford .
How can that be done ? 
It may be proper to conceal their engagement (if they  are  engaged) from Mrs. Smith ; and if that is the case , it must be highly expedient for Willoughby to be but little in Devonshire at present .
But Sir John could not prevail .
Unaccountable , however , as the circumstances of his release might appear to the whole family , it was certain that Edward was free ; and to what purpose that freedom would be employed was easily pre-determined by all ; -- for after experiencing the blessings of  one  imprudent engagement , contracted without his mother's consent , as he had already done for more than four years , nothing less could be expected of him in the failure of  that  , than the immediate contraction of another .
I have had to contend against the unkindness of his sister , and the insolence of his mother ; and have suffered the punishment of an attachment , without enjoying its advantages .
He is brother to Mrs. John Dashwood --  that  must be recommendation enough to her husband .
Yes -- no -- never absolutely .
Oh -- he did not say much ; but he looked as if he knew it to be true , so from that moment I set it down as certain .
Mrs. Dashwood had never been so much pleased with any young women in her life , as she was with them ; had given each of them a needle book made by some emigrant ; called Lucy by her Christian name ; and did not know whether she should ever be able to part with them .
I have some little concern in the business , as well as yourself , for Lucy Steele is my cousin , and I believe there is not a better kind of girl in the world , nor one who more deserves a good husband .
They will one day be Mr. Willoughby's , and --   If they were one day to be your own , Marianne , you would not be justified in what you have done .
Marianne looked very grave and said nothing .
I do not perceive how you could express yourself more warmly .
What is the matter with Brandon ? said Sir John .
This was an obligation , however , which not only opposed her own inclination , but which had not the assistance of any encouragement from her companions .
Who told you that Mr. Ferrars was married , Thomas ? 
Her joy and expression of regard long outlived her wonder .
To retreat was impossible .
She had no such object for her lingering thoughts to fix on , she left no creature behind , from whom it would give her a moment's regret to be divided for ever , she was pleased to be free herself from the persecution of Lucy's friendship , she was grateful for bringing her sister away unseen by Willoughby since his marriage , and she looked forward with hope to what a few months of tranquility at Barton might do towards restoring Marianne's peace of mind , and confirming her own .
Lucy came very shortly to claim Elinor's compassion on being unable to see Edward , though he had arrived in town with Mr. and Mrs. Dashwood .
But Marianne abhorred all concealment where no real disgrace could attend unreserve ; and to aim at the restraint of sentiments which were not in themselves illaudable , appeared to her not merely an unnecessary effort , but a disgraceful subjection of reason to common-place and mistaken notions .
Yes ; he has very good property in Dorsetshire .
Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John's proposal to your mother before it was made ? 
I never saw such fine children in my life .
She spent whole hours at the pianoforte alternately singing and crying ; her voice often totally suspended by her tears .
Marianne was still handsomer .
You had made your own choice .
Edward started .
I wish as well as every body else to be perfectly happy ; but , like every body else it must be in my own way .
How can you be so unjust ? 
She left to my care her only child , a little girl , the offspring of her first guilty connection , who was then about three years old .
At the park she laughed at the colonel , and in the cottage at Marianne .
Well , as you are resolved to go , I wish you a good journey .
Poor young man ! cried Mrs. Jennings , I am sure he should be very welcome to bed and board at my house ; and so I would tell him if I could see him .
I am sure I should have seen it in a moment , if Mrs. Ferrars had took a dislike to me .
Look up to it , and be tranquil if you can .
It suggested no other surprise than that Elinor and Marianne should sit so composedly by , without claiming a share in what was passing .
Has no letter been left here for me since we went out ? said she to the footman who then entered with the parcels .
Like him ! replied her mother with a smile .
No , indeed , not us .
The first part of their journey was performed in too melancholy a disposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant .
Elinor could  not  remember it ; -- but her mother , without waiting for her assent , continued --   And his manners , the Colonel's manners are not only more pleasing to me than Willoughby's ever were , but they are of a kind I well know to be more solidly attaching to Marianne .
And Marianne was in spirits ; happy in the mildness of the weather , and still happier in her expectation of a frost .
Because , replied he , smiling , among the rest of the objects before me , I see a very dirty lane .
You know I am always ready to pay them any attention in my power , as my taking them out this evening shows .
I never spent a pleasanter morning in my life .
At first sight , his address is certainly not striking ; and his person can hardly be called handsome , till the expression of his eyes , which are uncommonly good , and the general sweetness of his countenance , is perceived .
She is not well , she has had a nervous complaint on her for several weeks .
Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by any peculiar graces of person or address .
But how is your fame to be established ? for famous you must be to satisfy all your family ; and with no inclination for expense , no affection for strangers , no profession , and no assurance , you may find it a difficult matter .
It was broken by Lucy , who renewed the subject again by saying , with some hesitation --   I cannot bear to have you think me impertinently curious .
Nothing but a thorough change of sentiment could account for it .
The sisters set out at a pace , slow as the feebleness of Marianne in an exercise hitherto untried since her illness required ; -- and they had advanced only so far beyond the house as to admit a full view of the hill , the important hill behind , when pausing with her eyes turned towards it , Marianne calmly said --   There , exactly there , -- pointing with one hand , on that projecting mound , -- there I fell ; and there I first saw Willoughby .
Your sister's lovely person and interesting manners could not but please me ; and her behaviour to me almost from the first , was of a kind -- It is astonishing , when I reflect on what it was , and what  she  was , that my heart should have been so insensible !
So my daughter Middleton told me , for it seems Sir John met him somewhere in the street this morning .
The day of separation and departure arrived ; and Marianne , after taking so particular and lengthened a leave of Mrs. Jennings , one so earnestly grateful , so full of respect and kind wishes as seemed due to her own heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention , and bidding Colonel Brandon farewell with a cordiality of a friend , was carefully assisted by him into the carriage , of which he seemed anxious that she should engross at least half .
He took the opposite chair , and for half a minute not a word was said by either .
It is not time or opportunity that is to determine intimacy ; it is disposition alone .
I think every one  must  admire it , replied Elinor , who ever saw the place ; though it is not to be supposed that any one can estimate its beauties as we do .
Miss Steele was going to reply on the same subject , but the approach of her own party made another more necessary .
Or will it be wrong ? 
Edward , who had till then looked any where , rather than at her , saw her hurry away , and perhaps saw , or even heard , her emotion ; for immediately afterwards he fell into a reverie , which no remarks , no inquiries , no affectionate address of Mrs. Dashwood could penetrate , and at last , without saying a word , quitted the room , and walked out towards the village , leaving the others in the greatest astonishment and perplexity on a change in his situation , so wonderful and so sudden , -- a perplexity which they had no means of lessening but by their own conjectures .
He was a particular friend of Sir John's .
But Marianne , who saw his agitation , and could easily trace it to whatever cause best pleased herself , was perfectly satisfied , and soon talked of something else .
Civil ! -- Did you see nothing but only civility ?  -- I saw a vast deal more .
She perceived him soon afterwards looking at herself , and speaking familiarly to her brother ; and had just determined to find out his name from the latter , when they both came towards her , and Mr. Dashwood introduced him to her as Mr. Robert Ferrars .
I hope not , he replied , trying to look cheerful ; and with a forced smile presently added , It is I who may rather expect to be ill -- for I am now suffering under a very heavy disappointment !
When I first became intimate in your family , I had no other intention , no other view in the acquaintance than to pass my time pleasantly while I was obliged to remain in Devonshire , more pleasantly than I had ever done before .
I have heard , said he , with great compassion , of the injustice your friend Mr. Ferrars has suffered from his family ; for if I understand the matter right , he has been entirely cast off by them for persevering in his engagement with a very deserving young woman .
 They  only knew how little he had had to tempt him to be disobedient , and how small was the consolation , beyond the consciousness of doing right , that could remain to him in the loss of friends and fortune .
The rent of this cottage is said to be low ; but we have it on very hard terms , if we are to dine at the park whenever any one is staying either with them , or with us .
Know him ! to be sure I do .
She joined them sometimes at Sir John's , sometimes at her own house ; but wherever it was , she always came in excellent spirits , full of delight and importance , attributing Charlotte's well doing to her own care , and ready to give so exact , so minute a detail of her situation , as only Miss Steele had curiosity enough to desire .
Mrs. Palmer appeared quite well , and I am commissioned to tell you , that you will certainly see her to-morrow .
Elinor was half inclined to ask her reason for thinking so , because satisfied that none founded on an impartial consideration of their age , characters , or feelings , could be given ; -- but her mother must always be carried away by her imagination on any interesting subject , and therefore instead of an inquiry , she passed it off with a smile .
I never could have been happy with him , after knowing , as sooner or later I must have known , all this .
They were now joined by Mrs. Jennings , who had not patience enough to wait till the door was opened before she told  her  story .
She happened to be quite alone .
And yet it is not very unlikely .
What did you hear ? 
No , replied Elinor , most feelingly sensible of every fresh circumstance in favour of Lucy's veracity ; I remember he told us , that he had been staying a fortnight with some friends near Plymouth .
Can you , indeed !
But Edward had no turn for great men or barouches .
Your secret is safe with me ; but pardon me if I express some surprise at so unnecessary a communication .
Mrs. John Dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh :  she could not help feeling it hard that as Mrs. Dashwood's income would be so trifling in comparison with their own , she should have any handsome article of furniture .
To be sure it is ; and , indeed , it strikes me that they can want no addition at all .
Shall we see you tomorrow to dinner ? said Mrs. Dashwood , when he was leaving them .
My resolution was soon made , and at eight o'clock this morning I was in my carriage .
Perhaps it would have been as well if he had left it wholly to myself .
Have I been rightly informed ?  -- Is it so ?  --   Elinor told him that it was .
She saw them in an instant in their parsonage-house ; saw in Lucy , the active , contriving manager , uniting at once a desire of smart appearance with the utmost frugality , and ashamed to be suspected of half her economical practices ; pursuing her own interest in every thought , courting the favour of Colonel Brandon , of Mrs. Jennings , and of every wealthy friend .
She dreaded the performance of it , dreaded what its effect on Marianne might be ; doubted whether after such an explanation she could ever be happy with another ; and for a moment wished Willoughby a widower .
It is truly astonishing !
You decide on his imperfections so much in the mass , replied Elinor , and so much on the strength of your own imagination , that the commendation I am able to give of him is comparatively cold and insipid .
The latter , though unable to speak , seemed to feel all the tenderness of this behaviour , and after some time thus spent in joint affliction , she put all the letters into Elinor's hands ; and then covering her face with her handkerchief , almost screamed with agony .
She had taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to herself , as soon as it was known that the ceremony was over , as she was desirous that Marianne should not receive the first notice of it from the public papers , which she saw her eagerly examining every morning .
Well then ; I guess that Mr. Willoughby hunts .
The promise was readily given , and Willoughby's behaviour during the whole of the evening declared at once his affection and happiness .
Her sister was perhaps laid down upon the bed , or in her dressing gown , and therefore not able to come to them .
I did not know my danger till the danger was removed ; but with such feelings as these reflections gave me , I wonder at my recovery , -- wonder that the very eagerness of my desire to live , to have time for atonement to my God , and to you all , did not kill me at once .
Nay , my dear , I'm sure I don't pretend to say that there an't .
Is she angry ? 
Towards this home , she began on the approach of January to turn her thoughts , and thither she one day abruptly , and very unexpectedly by them , asked the elder Misses Dashwood to accompany her .
I admire them much more if they are tall , straight , and flourishing .
She was generous , amiable , interesting :  she was everything but prudent .
And how does dear , dear Norland look ? cried Marianne .
But , my dear Elinor , what is the matter with Marianne ?  -- she looks very unwell , has lost her colour , and is grown quite thin .
They were to meet Mrs. Ferrars ; but Elinor could not learn whether her sons were to be of the party .
Twice did I leave them purposely together in the course of the last morning , and each time did he most unaccountably follow me out of the room .
But for this strange kind of secrecy maintained by them relative to their engagement , which in fact concealed nothing at all , she could not account ; and it was so wholly contradictory to their general opinions and practice , that a doubt sometimes entered her mind of their being really engaged , and this doubt was enough to prevent her making any inquiry of Marianne .
From a night of more sleep than she had expected , Marianne awoke the next morning to the same consciousness of misery in which she had closed her eyes .
Never had any week passed so quickly -- he could hardly believe it to be gone .
Mrs. Dashwood seemed actually working for her , herself ; cherishing all her hopes , and promoting all her views !
Mrs. Dashwood immediately took all that trouble on herself ; and Elinor had the benefit of the information without the exertion of seeking it .
She sat by the drawing-room fire after tea , till the moment of Lady Middleton's arrival , without once stirring from her seat , or altering her attitude , lost in her own thoughts , and insensible of her sister's presence ; and when at last they were told that Lady Middleton waited for them at the door , she started as if she had forgotten that any one was expected .
This is strange indeed , when your eyes have been reproaching them every day for incautiousness .
Of Edward , or at least of some of his concerns , she now received intelligence from Colonel Brandon , who had been into Dorsetshire lately ; and who , treating her at once as the disinterested friend of Mr. Ferrars , and the kind confidante of himself , talked to her a great deal of the parsonage at Delaford , described its deficiencies , and told her what he meant to do himself towards removing them .
We must wait , it may be for many years .
He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to her's , and , with a look which perfectly assured her of his good information , inquired after her sister .
I am sorry to say , ma'am , in a most unhappy rupture :  -- Edward is dismissed for ever from his mother's notice .
Imagine to yourself , my dear Elinor , the delight of a gallop on some of these downs .
They are brought more within my comprehension .
They were engaged about the end of that time to attend Lady Middleton to a party , from which Mrs. Jennings was kept away by the indisposition of her youngest daughter ; and for this party , Marianne , wholly dispirited , careless of her appearance , and seeming equally indifferent whether she went or staid , prepared , without one look of hope or one expression of pleasure .
I am afraid it is but too true , said Marianne ; but why should you boast of it ? 
Well , I went , left all that I loved , and went to those to whom , at best , I was only indifferent .
Poor man !
Whatever may have changed him now , (and nothing but the blackest art employed against me can have done it) , I was once as dear to him as my own soul could wish .
To her it was but the natural consequence of a strong affection in a young and ardent mind .
So wondered , so talked Mrs. Jennings .
Her exertions did not stop here ; for she soon afterwards felt herself so heroically disposed as to determine , under pretence of fetching Marianne , to leave the others by themselves ; and she really did it , and  that  in the handsomest manner , for she loitered away several minutes on the landing-place , with the most high-minded fortitude , before she went to her sister .
Elinor tried very seriously to convince him that there was no likelihood of her marrying Colonel Brandon ; but it was an expectation of too much pleasure to himself to be relinquished , and he was really resolved on seeking an intimacy with that gentleman , and promoting the marriage by every possible attention .
It would have been such a great pity to have went away before your brother and sister came .
Elinor , too , was deeply afflicted ; but still she could struggle , she could exert herself .
But I would not alarm you too much .
I am monstrous glad of it .
Then you would be very ill-bred , cried Mr. Palmer .
One evening in particular , about a week after Colonel Brandon left the country , his heart seemed more than usually open to every feeling of attachment to the objects around him ; and on Mrs. Dashwood's happening to mention her design of improving the cottage in the spring , he warmly opposed every alteration of a place which affection had established as perfect with him .
Well , then ,  let  something be done for them ; but  that  something need not be three thousand pounds .
Nay , cried Mrs. Jennings , I am sure I shall be monstrous glad of Miss Marianne's company , whether Miss Dashwood will go or not , only the more the merrier say I , and I thought it would be more comfortable for them to be together ; because , if they got tired of me , they might talk to one another , and laugh at my old ways behind my back .
As for Lucy Steele , she considered her so totally unamiable , so absolutely incapable of attaching a sensible man , that she could not be persuaded at first to believe , and afterwards to pardon , any former affection of Edward for her .
Margaret related something to her the next day , which placed this matter in a still clearer light .
Though heavy and feverish , with a pain in her limbs , and a cough , and a sore throat , a good night's rest was to cure her entirely ; and it was with difficulty that Elinor prevailed on her , when she went to bed , to try one or two of the simplest of the remedies .
Every line , every word was -- in the hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer , were she here , would forbid -- a dagger to my heart .
My dear , said she , entering , I have just recollected that I have some of the finest old Constantia wine in the house that ever was tasted , so I have brought a glass of it for your sister .
Quite the contrary , replied Elinor , looking expressively at Marianne .
Elinor had given her real opinion to her sister .
Their being her relations too made it so much the worse ; and Mrs. Jennings's attempts at consolation were therefore unfortunately founded , when she advised her daughter not to care about their being so fashionable ; because they were all cousins and must put up with one another .
I thought you would , he is so pleasant ; and Mr. Palmer is excessively pleased with you and your sisters I can tell you , and you can't think how disappointed he will be if you don't come to Cleveland .
Every body's attention was called , and almost every body was concerned .
He insisted , moreover , on conveying all their letters to and from the post for them , and would not be denied the satisfaction of sending them his newspaper every day .
To give the feelings or the language of Mrs. Dashwood on receiving and answering Elinor's letter would be only to give a repetition of what her daughters had already felt and said ; of a disappointment hardly less painful than Marianne's , and an indignation even greater than Elinor's .
No .
We must go , for the Westons come to us next week you know .
I go to Oxford tomorrow .
Poor soul !
Marianne , who had seen him from the window , and who hated company of any kind , left the room before he entered it .
Oh , la ! here come the Richardsons .
Lord ! no wonder she has been looking so bad and so cast down this last week or two , for this matter I suppose has been hanging over her head as long as that .
The expectation of seeing  her  , however , was enough to make her interested in the engagement ; for though she could now meet Edward's mother without that strong anxiety which had once promised to attend such an introduction , though she could now see her with perfect indifference as to her opinion of herself , her desire of being in company with Mrs. Ferrars , her curiosity to know what she was like , was as lively as ever .
Then , perhaps , you cannot tell me what sort of a woman she is ? 
Lucy bit her lip , and looked angrily at her sister .
Whatever he might have heard against me , ought he not to have suspended his belief ? ought he not to have told me of it , to have given me the power of clearing myself ? 
Why , he is down here every year .
They will tell me I should write to the Doctor , to get Edward the curacy of his new living .
In this calm kind of way , with very little interest on either side , they continued to talk , both of them out of spirits , and the thoughts of both engaged elsewhere .
Then you would not have me tell it to Lucy , for I think of going as far as Holborn to-day .
Marianne coloured , and replied very hastily , Where , pray ? 
Is nothing due to the man whom we have all such reason to love , and no reason in the world to think ill of ?  -- to the possibility of motives unanswerable in themselves , though unavoidably secret for a while ? 
And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out in annuities on the authors or their heirs .
I have explained it to myself in the most satisfactory way ; but you , Elinor , who love to doubt where you can -- it will not satisfy  you  , I know ; but you shall not talk  me  out of my trust in it .
It is perfectly true .
Where did he live ? 
Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talk of what she felt ; and before breakfast was ready , they had gone through the subject again and again ; and with the same steady conviction and affectionate counsel on Elinor's side , the same impetuous feelings and varying opinions on Marianne's , as before .
The setting always casts a different shade on it , you know .
Elinor would not attempt to disturb a solitude so reasonable as what she now sought ; and with a mind anxiously pre-arranging its result , and a resolution of reviving the subject again , should Marianne fail to do it , she turned into the parlour to fulfill her parting injunction .
Mr. Dashwood's strains were more solemn .
She began almost to feel a dislike of Edward ; and it ended , as every feeling must end with her , by carrying back her thoughts to Willoughby , whose manners formed a contrast sufficiently striking to those of his brother elect .
Elinor thought she could distinguish a large W in the direction ; and no sooner was it complete than Marianne , ringing the bell , requested the footman who answered it to get that letter conveyed for her to the two-penny post .
The constant attention of Mr. and Mrs. Henry Dashwood to his wishes , which proceeded not merely from interest , but from goodness of heart , gave him every degree of solid comfort which his age could receive ; and the cheerfulness of the children added a relish to his existence .
Elinor , with a very heavy heart , aware of the pain she was going to communicate , and perceiving , by Marianne's letter , how ill she had succeeded in laying any foundation for it , then sat down to write her mother an account of what had passed , and entreat her directions for the future ; while Marianne , who came into the drawing-room on Mrs. Jennings's going away , remained fixed at the table where Elinor wrote , watching the advancement of her pen , grieving over her for the hardship of such a task , and grieving still more fondly over its effect on her mother .
I did not know , said she , that you were even acquainted till the other day .
The Dashwoods were two days on the road , and Marianne bore her journey on both , without essential fatigue .
I love Willoughby , sincerely love him ; and suspicion of his integrity cannot be more painful to yourself than to me .
And for your own sake too , or you are carrying your disinterestedness beyond reason .
It came from town , and is merely a letter of business .
If dancing formed the amusement of the night , they were partners for half the time ; and when obliged to separate for a couple of dances , were careful to stand together and scarcely spoke a word to any body else .
I should be undeserving of the confidence you have honoured me with , if I felt no desire for its continuance , or no farther curiosity on its subject .
I could hardly keep my seat .
Ay , you may abuse me as you please , said the good-natured old lady , you have taken Charlotte off my hands , and cannot give her back again .
Yet , though smiling within herself at the mistake , she honoured her sister for that blind partiality to Edward which produced it .
Disappointed , however , and vexed as she was , and sometimes displeased with his uncertain behaviour to herself , she was very well disposed on the whole to regard his actions with all the candid allowances and generous qualifications , which had been rather more painfully extorted from her , for Willoughby's service , by her mother .
No , none at all , he replied , and read on .
They are both delightful women , indeed ! -- I wonder I should never hear you say how agreeable Mrs. Dashwood was !
But though confidence between them was , by this public discovery , restored to its proper state , it was not a subject on which either of them were fond of dwelling when alone .
The parties stood thus :  --   The two mothers , though each really convinced that her own son was the tallest , politely decided in favour of the other .
The secrecy with which everything had been carried on between them , was rationally treated as enormously heightening the crime , because , had any suspicion of it occurred to the others , proper measures would have been taken to prevent the marriage ; and he called on Elinor to join with him in regretting that Lucy's engagement with Edward had not rather been fulfilled , than that she should thus be the means of spreading misery farther in the family .
Poor little creatures ! said Miss Steele , as soon as they were gone .
Elinor , rejoiced to be assured of his being in London , now ventured to say , Depend upon it , he will call again tomorrow .
Now was the time when her son-in-law's promise to his father might with particular propriety be fulfilled .
Your friend , Miss Marianne , too -- which you will not be sorry to hear .
Elinor could not hear the declaration , nor witness its proofs without sometimes wondering whether her mother ever recollected Edward .
Elinor tenderly invited her to be open .
He really pressed them , with some earnestness , to consider Norland as their home ; and , as no plan appeared so eligible to Mrs. Dashwood as remaining there till she could accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood , his invitation was accepted .
And at any rate , she lost nothing by continuing the engagement , for she has proved that it fettered neither her inclination nor her actions .
I saw that my own feelings had prepared my sufferings , and that my want of fortitude under them had almost led me to the grave .
What am I to tell you ? 
You may believe how glad we all were to see them , added Mrs. Jennings , leaning forward towards Elinor , and speaking in a low voice as if she meant to be heard by no one else , though they were seated on different sides of the room ; but , however , I can't help wishing they had not travelled quite so fast , nor made such a long journey of it , for they came all round by London upon account of some business , for you know (nodding significantly and pointing to her daughter) it was wrong in her situation .
Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that her mother had been quite rude enough , -- for , colouring a little , she immediately said --   They are very pretty , ma'am -- an't they ? 
You are expecting a letter , then ? said Elinor , unable to be longer silent .
Yes , yes ,  that  in particular .
He could only plead an ignorance of his own heart , and a mistaken confidence in the force of his engagement .
In the country , an unpremeditated dance was very allowable ; but in London , where the reputation of elegance was more important and less easily attained , it was risking too much for the gratification of a few girls , to have it known that Lady Middleton had given a small dance of eight or nine couple , with two violins , and a mere side-board collation .
Never mind if they do .
I am glad , said Lady Middleton to Lucy , you are not going to finish poor little Annamaria's basket this evening ; for I am sure it must hurt your eyes to work filigree by candlelight .
To separate Edward and Elinor was as far from being her object as ever ; and she wished to show Mrs. John Dashwood , by this pointed invitation to her brother , how totally she disregarded her disapprobation of the match .
He saw her concern , and coming to her , took her hand , pressed it , and kissed it with grateful respect .
It is but a cottage , she continued , but I hope to see many of my friends in it .
Whatever your business may be with me , it will be better recollected and explained to-morrow .
The distress of her sister too , particularly a favourite , was before her ; -- and as for their mother , when Mrs. Jennings considered that Marianne might probably be to  her  what Charlotte was to herself , her sympathy in  her  sufferings was very sincere .
Concern for her unhappiness , and respect for her fortitude under it , must strengthen every attachment .
Ay , it is a fine thing to be young and handsome .
Mrs. Jennings laughed heartily ; and Elinor found that in her resolution to know where they had been , she had actually made her own woman enquire of Mr. Willoughby's groom ; and that she had by that method been informed that they had gone to Allenham , and spent a considerable time there in walking about the garden and going all over the house .
Elinor would not contend , and only replied , Whoever may have been so detestably your enemy , let them be cheated of their malignant triumph , my dear sister , by seeing how nobly the consciousness of your own innocence and good intentions supports your spirits .
Truth obliged her to acknowledge some small share in the action , but she was at the same time so unwilling to appear as the benefactress of Edward , that she acknowledged it with hesitation ; which probably contributed to fix that suspicion in his mind which had recently entered it .
He wished him at the devil with all his heart .
Only think of their coming so suddenly !
But had I been informed of it a few hours earlier , I think it is most probable that something might have been hit on .
One meeting was unavoidable .
They both seemed delighted with their drive ; but said only in general terms that they had kept in the lanes , while the others went on the downs .
You may esteem him .
Who ? why yourselves , and the Careys , and Whitakers to be sure .
I like a fine prospect , but not on picturesque principles .
Very well upon my word .
If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike of Mrs. Jennings , said Marianne , at least it need not prevent  my  accepting her invitation .
It is a sweet place , by all accounts .
I understand that he intends to take orders .
Mrs. Palmer laughed heartily at the recollection of their astonishment , and every body agreed , two or three times over , that it had been quite an agreeable surprise .
It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness , and she immediately left the room .
Two delightful twilight walks on the third and fourth evenings of her being there , not merely on the dry gravel of the shrubbery , but all over the grounds , and especially in the most distant parts of them , where there was something more of wildness than in the rest , where the trees were the oldest , and the grass was the longest and wettest , had -- assisted by the still greater imprudence of sitting in her wet shoes and stockings -- given Marianne a cold so violent as , though for a day or two trifled with or denied , would force itself by increasing ailments on the concern of every body , and the notice of herself .
He said much of his earnest desire of their living in the most sociable terms with his family , and pressed them so cordially to dine at Barton Park every day till they were better settled at home , that , though his entreaties were carried to a point of perseverance beyond civility , they could not give offence .
She was well paid for her impudence .
That was what I said immediately .
She had nothing to say one day that she had not said the day before .
Recollecting himself , however , he added , That is , I mean to say -- your friends are all truly anxious to see you well settled ; Fanny particularly , for she has your interest very much at heart , I assure you .
Mamma , how shall we do without her ? 
As Elinor and Marianne were walking together the next morning the latter communicated a piece of news to her sister , which in spite of all that she knew before of Marianne's imprudence and want of thought , surprised her by its extravagant testimony of both .
By his own marriage , likewise , which happened soon afterwards , he added to his wealth .
Marianne's preserver , as Margaret , with more elegance than precision , styled Willoughby , called at the cottage early the next morning to make his personal enquiries .
Yes , a great while ; ever since my sister married .
The bustle in the vestibule , as she passed along an inner lobby , assured her that they were already in the house .
That must be enough for us both .
I am sorry you do not happen to know Mrs. Ferrars .
 -- but checking her desire , confined herself to this silent ejaculation .
 -- was repeated by Marianne and her mother in an accent of the utmost amazement ; -- and though Elinor could not speak , even  her  eyes were fixed on him with the same impatient wonder .
Well , Colonel , I have brought two young ladies with me , you see -- that is , you see but one of them now , but there is another somewhere .
I suspect , said Elinor , that to avoid one kind of affectation , Edward here falls into another .
Poor Edward !
You must think wretchedly indeed of Willoughby , if , after all that has openly passed between them , you can doubt the nature of the terms on which they are together .
I am , dear Madam ,  Your most obedient humble servant ,  JOHN WILLOUGHBY .
The event proved her conjecture right , though it was founded on injustice and error ; for Colonel Brandon  did  come in ; and Elinor , who was convinced that solicitude for Marianne brought him thither , and who saw  that  solicitude in his disturbed and melancholy look , and in his anxious though brief inquiry after her , could not forgive her sister for esteeming him so lightly .
Their affection and pleasure in meeting was just enough to make a very creditable appearance in Mr. Gray's shop .
They were again silent for many minutes .
Did you see them off , before you came away ? 
Elinor laughed .
From you , her mother , and so kind , so indulgent a mother , the question could not give offence .
I wonder what it can be !
Ah ! said Colonel Brandon , there is , indeed !
You will gain a brother  --  a real , affectionate brother .
Elinor's heart , which had undergone many changes in the course of this extraordinary conversation , was now softened again ; -- yet she felt it her duty to check such ideas in her companion as the last .
At any rate , said Elinor , wishing to prevent Mrs. Jennings from seeing her sister's thoughts as clearly as she did , I dare say we shall have Sir John and Lady Middleton in town by the end of next week .
In his marrying such a woman therefore there would be nothing unsuitable .
A letter of proper submission ! repeated he ; would they have me beg my mother's pardon for Robert's ingratitude to  her  , and breach of honour to  me  ? 
It would be something remarkable , now , he continued , something droll , if Fanny should have a brother and I a sister settling at the same time .
I am flattered by his commendation .
But I cannot talk .
By one measure I might have saved myself .
He was tired , I dare say , for he had just filled the sheet to me as full as possible .
Colonel , said she , with her usual noisy cheerfulness , I am monstrous glad to see you -- sorry I could not come before -- beg your pardon , but I have been forced to look about me a little , and settle my matters ; for it is a long while since I have been at home , and you know one has always a world of little odd things to do after one has been away for any time ; and then I have had Cartwright to settle with .
Who would submit to the indignity of being approved by such a woman as Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings , that could command the indifference of any body else ? 
Elinor , according to her expectation , saw on the two or three following days , that Marianne did not continue to gain strength as she had done ; but while her resolution was unsubdued , and she still tried to appear cheerful and easy , her sister could safely trust to the effect of time upon her health .
They met for the sake of eating , drinking , and laughing together , playing at cards , or consequences , or any other game that was sufficiently noisy .
You have been long acquainted with Colonel Brandon , have not you ? 
He will be there in February , otherwise London would have no charms for me ; I have not spirits for it .
The slightest mention of anything relative to Willoughby overpowered her in an instant ; and though her family were most anxiously attentive to her comfort , it was impossible for them , if they spoke at all , to keep clear of every subject which her feelings connected with him .
I dare say you are , and I am sure I do not at all wonder at it .
Elinor was obliged , though unwillingly , to believe that the sentiments which Mrs. Jennings had assigned him for her own satisfaction , were now actually excited by her sister ; and that however a general resemblance of disposition between the parties might forward the affection of Mr. Willoughby , an equally striking opposition of character was no hindrance to the regard of Colonel Brandon .
The motive was too common to be wondered at ; but the means , however they might succeed by establishing his superiority in ill-breeding , were not likely to attach any one to him except his wife .
But two advantages will proceed from this delay .
I have found him capable of giving me much information on various subjects ; and he has always answered my inquiries with readiness of good-breeding and good nature .
How I shall laugh !
Though  we  have not known him long , he is no stranger in this part of the world ; and who has ever spoken to his disadvantage ? 
The important Tuesday came that was to introduce the two young ladies to this formidable mother-in-law .
And so the letter that came today finished it !
Colonel Brandon , the friend of Sir John , seemed no more adapted by resemblance of manner to be his friend , than Lady Middleton was to be his wife , or Mrs. Jennings to be Lady Middleton's mother .
It exactly answers my idea of a fine country , because it unites beauty with utility -- and I dare say it is a picturesque one too , because you admire it ; I can easily believe it to be full of rocks and promontories , grey moss and brush wood , but these are all lost on me .
When your father and mother moved to Norland , though the furniture of Stanhill was sold , all the china , plate , and linen was saved , and is now left to your mother .
When do you write to Colonel Brandon , ma'am ? was an inquiry which sprung from the impatience of her mind to have something going on .
It must have been only to one end .
Mrs. Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with him .
She came in with a smile , smiled all the time of her visit , except when she laughed , and smiled when she went away .
Reserved !
Remember that you are married .
Elinor was very angry , but Marianne seemed entirely insensible of the sting ; for she calmly replied --   Not so , indeed ; for , seriously speaking , I am very sure that conscience only kept Edward from Harley Street .
Careless of her happiness , thinking only of my own amusement , giving way to feelings which I had always been too much in the habit of indulging , I endeavoured , by every means in my power , to make myself pleasing to her , without any design of returning her affection .
But while she wondered at the difference of the two young men , she did not find that the emptiness and conceit of the one , put her out of all charity with the modesty and worth of the other .
Their means were as different as their objects , and equally suited to the advancement of each .
He tried to reason himself out of fears , which the different judgment of the apothecary seemed to render absurd ; but the many hours of each day in which he was left entirely alone , were but too favourable for the admission of every melancholy idea , and he could not expel from his mind the persuasion that he should see Marianne no more .
On such a subject , sighing heavily , can I have little temptation to be diffuse .
She wondered , indeed , at his thinking it necessary to do so ; but supposed it to be the proper etiquette .
Ah !
Not aware of their being in town , however , I blundered on Sir John , I believe , the first day of his coming , and the day after I had called at Mrs. Jennings's .
Have you not received my letters ? 
I understand you , he replied , with an expressive smile , and a voice perfectly calm ; yes , I am very drunk .
To the left is Barton park , amongst those woods and plantations .
Pardon me , replied Elinor , startled by the question ; but I can give you no advice under such circumstances .
Poor fellow ! to see him in a circle of strangers ! to be sure it was pitiable enough ; but upon my soul , I believe he has as good a heart as any in the kingdom ; and I declare and protest to you I never was so shocked in my life , as when it all burst forth .
I had no hope of interfering with success ; and sometimes I thought your sister's influence might yet reclaim him .
My judgment , he returned , is all on your side of the question  ; but I am afraid my practice is much more on your sister's .
In one of these excursive glances she perceived among a group of young men , the very he , who had given them a lecture on toothpick-cases at Gray's .
Nothing , for you have anticipated my answer .
But you may be assured that I would not sacrifice one sentiment of local attachment of yours , or of any one whom I loved , for all the improvements in the world .
A few moments' reflection , however , produced a very happy idea , and she exclaimed --   Oh , ho !
Ah ! -- no , -- have you forgot what passed in town ? 
Elinor , who foresaw a fairer opening for the point she had in view , in such a party as this was likely to be , more at liberty among themselves under the tranquil and well-bred direction of Lady Middleton than when her husband united them together in one noisy purpose , immediately accepted the invitation ; Margaret , with her mother's permission , was equally compliant , and Marianne , though always unwilling to join any of their parties , was persuaded by her mother , who could not bear to have her seclude herself from any chance of amusement , to go likewise .
My love you contradict every body , said his wife with her usual laugh .
My paper reminds me to      conclude ; and begging to be most gratefully and respectfully      remembered to her , and to Sir John , and Lady Middleton , and      the dear children , when you chance to see them , and love to      Miss Marianne ,  I am , etc. , etc .
The triumph of seeing me so may be open to all the world .
His visit was duly paid .
It was late in the morning before they returned home ; and no sooner had they entered the house than Marianne flew eagerly up stairs , and when Elinor followed , she found her turning from the table with a sorrowful countenance , which declared that no Willoughby had been there .
After a short pause he resumed the conversation by saying --   Does your sister make no distinction in her objections against a second attachment ? or is it equally criminal in every body ? 
I am sure I wonder my heart is not quite broke .
She paused -- and added in a low voice , If I could but know  his  heart , everything would become easy .
No , not if it were to be by the side of Barton covert , and they were kept watching for two hours together .
Lucy here looked up ; but Elinor was careful in guarding her countenance from every expression that could give her words a suspicious tendency .
An opportunity of coming hither ,      though with Mrs. Jennings , was a temptation we could not      resist .
And so I shall always say , my dear , you may depend on it .
His wife hesitated a little , however , in giving her consent to this plan .
Aye , aye , the parsonage is but a small one , said she , after the first ebullition of surprise and satisfaction was over , and very likely  may  be out of repair ; but to hear a man apologising , as I thought , for a house that to my knowledge has five sitting rooms on the ground-floor , and I think the housekeeper told me could make up fifteen beds ! and to you too , that had been used to live in Barton cottage !
Marianne can never keep long from that instrument you know , ma'am , said Elinor , endeavouring to smooth away the offence ; and I do not much wonder at it ; for it is the very best toned piano-forte I ever heard .
About four days after Edward's arrival Colonel Brandon appeared , to complete Mrs. Dashwood's satisfaction , and to give her the dignity of having , for the first time since her living at Barton , more company with her than her house would hold .
I felt for my sister most severely .
Mrs. Robert Ferrars !
She was sitting near the window , and as soon as Sir John perceived her , he left the rest of the party to the ceremony of knocking at the door , and stepping across the turf , obliged her to open the casement to speak to him , though the space was so short between the door and the window , as to make it hardly possible to speak at one without being heard at the other .
Elinor's compassion for him increased , as she had reason to suspect that the misery of disappointed love had already been known to him .
 Two  thousand a year !
How can you think of dirt , with such objects before you ? 
And drawing him a little aside , she whispered her persuasion that Lucy could not stay much longer .
He never tells me any thing !
Her mind did become settled , but it was settled in a gloomy dejection .
Sir John's confidence in his own judgment rose with this animated praise , and he set off directly for the cottage to tell the Miss Dashwoods of the Miss Steeles' arrival , and to assure them of their being the sweetest girls in the world .
To be sure it will .
Then , remembering Colonel Brandon , reproved herself , felt that to  his  sufferings and  his  constancy far more than to his rival's , the reward of her sister was due , and wished any thing rather than Mrs. Willoughby's death .
Oh ! dear , how beautiful these are !
Do you suppose him really indifferent to her ? 
Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon's being expected at the Cottage , as he really wished not only to be better acquainted with him , but to have an opportunity of convincing him that he no longer resented his giving him the living of Delaford -- Which , at present , said he , after thanks so ungraciously delivered as mine were on the occasion , he must think I have never forgiven him for offering .
The whole of Lucy's behaviour in the affair , and the prosperity which crowned it , therefore , may be held forth as a most encouraging instance of what an earnest , an unceasing attention to self-interest , however its progress may be apparently obstructed , will do in securing every advantage of fortune , with no other sacrifice than that of time and conscience .
I meant , said Elinor , taking up some work from the table , to inquire for Mrs.  Edward  Ferrars .
Perhaps , said Willoughby , his observations may have extended to the existence of nabobs , gold mohrs , and palanquins .
She was faithful to her word ; and when Willoughby called at the cottage , the same day , Elinor heard her express her disappointment to him in a low voice , on being obliged to forego the acceptance of his present .
She saw nothing of the Willoughbys , nothing of Edward , and for some time nothing of anybody who could by any chance whether grave or gay , be interesting to her .
Elinor could not find herself in the carriage with Mrs. Jennings , and beginning a journey to London under her protection , and as her guest , without wondering at her own situation , so short had their acquaintance with that lady been , so wholly unsuited were they in age and disposition , and so many had been her objections against such a measure only a few days before !
Mrs. Jennings was quite right in what she said .
The ivory , the gold , and the pearls , all received their appointment , and the gentleman having named the last day on which his existence could be continued without the possession of the toothpick-case , drew on his gloves with leisurely care , and bestowing another glance on the Miss Dashwoods , but such a one as seemed rather to demand than express admiration , walked off with a happy air of real conceit and affected indifference .
Colonel Brandon must have some information to give .
Elinor's satisfaction , at the moment of removal , was more positive .
I cannot , I cannot , cried Marianne ; leave me , leave me , if I distress you ; leave me , hate me , forget me ! but do not torture me so .
Yes , but I had only the credit of servilely copying such sentences as I was ashamed to put my name to .
At ten o'clock , she trusted , or at least not much later her mother would be relieved from the dreadful suspense in which she must now be travelling towards them .
It was settled that there should be a dance in the evening , and that every body should be extremely merry all day long .
I was simple enough to think , that because my  faith  was plighted to another , there could be no danger in my being with you ; and that the consciousness of my engagement was to keep my heart as safe and sacred as my honour .
She was born to discover the falsehood of her own opinions , and to counteract , by her conduct , her most favourite maxims .
Indeed you wrong me , replied Lucy , with great solemnity ; I know nobody of whose judgment I think so highly as I do of yours ; and I do really believe , that if you was to say to me , I advise you by all means to put an end to your engagement with Edward Ferrars , it will be more for the happiness of both of you ,  I should resolve upon doing it immediately .
Marianne remained perfectly silent , though her countenance betrayed her interest in what was said .
Come , what is your competence ? 
If their evenings at the park were concluded with cards , he cheated himself and all the rest of the party to get her a good hand .
Mrs. Smith has this morning exercised the privilege of riches upon a poor dependent cousin , by sending me on business to London .
Well !
I have a notion , said Lucy , you think the little Middletons rather too much indulged ; perhaps they may be the outside of enough ; but it is so natural in Lady Middleton ; and for my part , I love to see children full of life and spirits ; I cannot bear them if they are tame and quiet .
It came out quite unawares , quite undesignedly .
The treachery , or the folly , of my cousin's maid betrayed us .
He had not seen me then above twice , for it was before I left school .
Amongst them were Sir John and Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings , but there were two others , a gentleman and lady , who were quite unknown to her .
You cannot doubt your sister's wishes .
Upon my word , I am not acquainted with the minuti of her principles .
Scarcely a word was spoken during their return to Berkeley Street .
Mrs. Ferrars , with the utmost liberality , will come forward , and settle on him a thousand a year , if the match takes place .
Poor Edward !
Marianne , few as had been her hours of comfort in London , and eager as she had long been to quit it , could not , when it came to the point , bid adieu to the house in which she had for the last time enjoyed those hopes , and that confidence , in Willoughby , which were now extinguished for ever , without great pain .
He tried to smile as he replied , your sister's engagement to Mr. Willoughby is very generally known .
She felt the loss of Willoughby's character yet more heavily than she had felt the loss of his heart ; his seduction and desertion of Miss Williams , the misery of that poor girl , and the doubt of what his designs might  once  have been on herself , preyed altogether so much on her spirits , that she could not bring herself to speak of what she felt even to Elinor ; and , brooding over her sorrows in silence , gave more pain to her sister than could have been communicated by the most open and most frequent confession of them .
He asked me to a party , a dance at his house in the evening .
Yet I hardly know how , cried Marianne , unless it had been under totally different circumstances .
Colonel Brandon give  me  a living ! -- Can it be possible ? 
Are you acquainted with Mr. Robert Ferrars ? 
Then I must bid you farewell for a longer time than I should wish to do .
I do not care if it  is  the Doctor's favourite colour .
Poor Edward ! he has done for himself completely , -- shut himself out for ever from all decent society ! but , as I directly said to my mother , I am not in the least surprised at it ; from his style of education , it was always to be expected .
That is good news however ; I will ride over tomorrow , and ask him to dinner on Thursday .
I met Colonel Brandon Monday morning in Bond-street , just before we left town , and he told me of it directly .
The subject was continued no farther ; and Marianne remained thoughtfully silent , till a new object suddenly engaged her attention .
Edward said very little ; but what he did say , was in the most determined manner .
To suffer you all to be so deceived ; to see your sister -- but what could I do ? 
Mrs. Dashwood smiled , and said nothing .
 Then  , if I had not been bound to silence , perhaps nothing could have kept me entirely -- not even what I owed to my dearest friends -- from openly showing that I was  very  unhappy .
We must go , said Sir John .
Her guardians , my dear .
Ah , well ! there is not much difference .
What an ill-natured woman his mother is , an't she ? 
When Edward's unhappy match takes place , depend upon it his mother will feel as much as if she had never discarded him ; and , therefore every circumstance that may accelerate that dreadful event , must be concealed from her as much as possible .
Have you forgot the last evening of our being together at Barton ? 
Tell her of my misery and my penitence -- tell her that my heart was never inconstant to her , and if you will , that at this moment she is dearer to me than ever .
Elinor's office was a painful one .
Had he been only in a violent fever , you would not have despised him half so much .
Mrs. Dashwood was denied ; but before the carriage could turn from the house , her husband accidentally came out .
Elinor bowed her assent .
With difficulty however could she prevent her from following him herself ; and to persuade her to check her agitation , to wait , at least , with the appearance of composure , till she might speak to him with more privacy and more effect , was impossible ; for Marianne continued incessantly to give way in a low voice to the misery of her feelings , by exclamations of wretchedness .
It had no park , but the pleasure-grounds were tolerably extensive ; and like every other place of the same degree of importance , it had its open shrubbery , and closer wood walk , a road of smooth gravel winding round a plantation , led to the front , the lawn was dotted over with timber , the house itself was under the guardianship of the fir , the mountain-ash , and the acacia , and a thick screen of them altogether , interspersed with tall Lombardy poplars , shut out the offices .
She began to think that he must be in liquor ; -- the strangeness of such a visit , and of such manners , seemed no otherwise intelligible ; and with this impression she immediately rose , saying --   Mr. Willoughby , I advise you at present to return to Combe -- I am not at leisure to remain with you longer .
To hear those beautiful lines which have frequently almost driven me wild , pronounced with such impenetrable calmness , such dreadful indifference !
Mamma , you are not doing me justice .
Oh , oh ! cried Mrs. Jennings ; very pretty , indeed ! and the Doctor is a single man , I warrant you .
I have never mentioned it to her , but of course she must .
The clouds seem parting too , the sun will be out in a moment , and we shall have a clear afternoon .
To treat her with unkindness , to speak of her slightingly is no atonement to Marianne -- nor can I suppose it a relief to your own conscience .
Edward seemed a second Willoughby ; and acknowledging as Elinor did , that she  had  loved him most sincerely , could she feel less than herself !
She blushed at this hint ; but it was even visibly gratifying to her ; and after a ten minutes' interval of earnest thought , she came to her sister again , and said with great good humour , Perhaps , Elinor , it  was  rather ill-judged in me to go to Allenham ; but Mr. Willoughby wanted particularly to show me the place ; and it is a charming house , I assure you .
To do him justice , he did every thing in his power to promote their unreserve , by making the Miss Steeles acquainted with whatever he knew or supposed of his cousins' situations in the most delicate particulars , -- and Elinor had not seen them more than twice , before the eldest of them wished her joy on her sister's having been so lucky as to make a conquest of a very smart beau since she came to Barton .
Is she ill ? 
Now , though at first she will suffer much , I am sure she will soon become easier .
Two days passed away from the time of Mr. Palmer's departure , and her situation continued , with little variation , the same .
After a moment's recollection , therefore , concluding that prudence required dispatch , and that her acquiescence would best promote it , she walked silently towards the table , and sat down .
Mrs. Dashwood  would  sit up with her all night ; and Elinor , in compliance with her mother's entreaty , went to bed .
Aye , aye , that is very pretty talking -- but it won't do -- the Doctor is the man , I see .
Willoughby had spent the preceding evening with them , and Margaret , by being left some time in the parlour with only him and Marianne , had had opportunity for observations , which , with a most important face , she communicated to her eldest sister , when they were next by themselves .
Perhaps , continued Elinor , if I should happen to cut out , I may be of some use to Miss Lucy Steele , in rolling her papers for her ; and there is so much still to be done to the basket , that it must be impossible I think for her labour singly , to finish it this evening .
Mrs. Jennings laughed again , but Elinor had not spirits to say more , and eager at all events to know what Willoughby had written , hurried away to their room , where , on opening the door , she saw Marianne stretched on the bed , almost choked by grief , one letter in her hand , and two or three others laying by her .
Remember , my love , that you are not seventeen .
Oh ! how easy for those , who have no sorrow of their own to talk of exertion !
We did , indeed , particularly so when he first arrived .
Well , it don't signify talking ; but when a young man , be who he will , comes and makes love to a pretty girl , and promises marriage , he has no business to fly off from his word only because he grows poor , and a richer girl is ready to have him .
I could rather believe every creature of my acquaintance leagued together to ruin me in his opinion , than believe his nature capable of such cruelty .
My own loss is great , he continued , in being obliged to leave so agreeable a party ; but I am the more concerned , as I fear my presence is necessary to gain your admittance at Whitwell .
I have laid down my plan , and if I am capable of adhering to it -- my feelings shall be governed and my temper improved .
I had quite depended upon meeting you there .
But it would have been more like Willoughby to acknowledge them at once .
I was repulsed indeed !
We will walk to the farm at the edge of the down , and see how the children go on ; we will walk to Sir John's new plantations at Barton Cross , and the Abbeyland ; and we will often go the old ruins of the Priory , and try to trace its foundations as far as we are told they once reached .
Excellent indeed .
The man and one of the maids were sent off immediately into Devonshire , to prepare the house for their mistress's arrival ; for as Lady Middleton was entirely unknown to Mrs. Dashwood , she preferred going directly to the cottage to being a visitor at Barton Park ; and she relied so undoubtingly on Sir John's description of the house , as to feel no curiosity to examine it herself till she entered it as her own .
He was not handsome , and his manners required intimacy to make them pleasing .
His behaviour to her in this , as well as in every other particular , his open pleasure in meeting her after an absence of only ten days , his readiness to converse with her , and his deference for her opinion , might very well justify Mrs. Jennings's persuasion of his attachment , and would have been enough , perhaps , had not Elinor still , as from the first , believed Marianne his real favourite , to make her suspect it herself .
It is yet too early in life to despair of such a happiness .
A narrow passage led directly through the house into the garden behind .
It was a foolish , idle inclination on my side , said he , the consequence of ignorance of the world and want of employment .
It determined him to attempt a reconciliation , though not exactly in the manner pointed out by their brother and sister .
It chiefly consisted of household linen , plate , china , and books , with a handsome pianoforte of Marianne's .
And the dried cherries too !
The power of disappointing them , it was true , must always be her's .
Margaret , said Marianne with great warmth , you know that all this is an invention of your own , and that there is no such person in existence .
Edward's embarrassment lasted some time , and it ended in an absence of mind still more settled .
Edward had been staying several weeks in the house before he engaged much of Mrs. Dashwood's attention ; for she was , at that time , in such affliction as rendered her careless of surrounding objects .
They are seen only as a nuisance , swept hastily off , and driven as much as possible from the sight .
Another pause therefore of many minutes' duration , succeeded this speech , and Lucy was still the first to end it .
Good-bye ; I am sorry Miss Marianne was not here .
He was neither so unjust , nor so ungrateful , as to leave his estate from his nephew ; but he left it to him on such terms as destroyed half the value of the bequest .
Her heart was devoted to Willoughby , and the fond attachment to Norland , which she brought with her from Sussex , was more likely to be softened than she had thought it possible before , by the charms which his society bestowed on her present home .
She was without any power , because she was without any desire of command over herself .
She gave her an answer which marked her contempt , and instantly left the room , resolving that , whatever might be the inconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal , her beloved Elinor should not be exposed another week to such insinuations .
Such a woman as I am sure Fanny will be glad to know .
I see Mr. Ferrars myself , ma'am , this morning in Exeter , and his lady too , Miss Steele as was .
Certainly .
She thought of what had just passed with anxiety and distrust .
 Then  she fell into hysterics again , and he was so frightened that he would send for Mr. Donavan , and Mr. Donavan found the house in all this uproar .
The wind roared round the house , and the rain beat against the windows ; but Elinor , all happiness within , regarded it not .
Elinor would not humour her by farther opposition .
But you really do admit the justice of what I have said in his defence ?  -- I am happy -- and he is acquitted .
It is enough , said she ; to say that he is unlike Fanny is enough .
He understood that she was in need of a dwelling ; and though the house he now offered her was merely a cottage , he assured her that everything should be done to it which she might think necessary , if the situation pleased her .
Lord ! thinks she to herself , they are all so fond of Lucy , to be sure they will make no difficulty about it ; and so , away she went to your sister , who was sitting all alone at her carpet-work , little suspecting what was to come -- for she had just been saying to your brother , only five minutes before , that she thought to make a match between Edward and some Lord's daughter or other , I forget who .
I once knew a lady who in temper and mind greatly resembled your sister , who thought and judged like her , but who from an enforced change -- from a series of unfortunate circumstances --  Here he stopped suddenly ; appeared to think that he had said too much , and by his countenance gave rise to conjectures , which might not otherwise have entered Elinor's head .
Hush ! they will hear you .
But while she smiled at a graciousness so misapplied , she could not reflect on the mean-spirited folly from which it sprung , nor observe the studied attentions with which the Miss Steeles courted its continuance , without thoroughly despising them all four .
But at last she found herself with some surprise , accosted by Miss Steele , who , though looking rather shy , expressed great satisfaction in meeting them , and on receiving encouragement from the particular kindness of Mrs. Jennings , left her own party for a short time , to join their's .
Elinor , for her sister's sake , could not press the subject farther , and she hoped it was not required of her for Willoughby's ; since , though Marianne might lose much , he could gain very little by the enforcement of the real truth .
Little did Mr. Willoughby imagine , I suppose , when his looks censured me for incivility in breaking up the party , that I was called away to the relief of one whom he had made poor and miserable ; but  had  he known it , what would it have availed ? 
Beyond a competence , it can afford no real satisfaction , as far as mere self is concerned .
I am monstrous glad of it , for then I shall have her for a neighbour you know .
It raises my influence much too high ; the power of dividing two people so tenderly attached is too much for an indifferent person .
Not so large , I dare say , as many people suppose .
Mrs. Dashwood , whose eyes , as she answered the servant's inquiry , had intuitively taken the same direction , was shocked to perceive by Elinor's countenance how much she really suffered , and a moment afterwards , alike distressed by Marianne's situation , knew not on which child to bestow her principal attention .
The past , the present , the future , Willoughby's visit , Marianne's safety , and her mother's expected arrival , threw her altogether into an agitation of spirits which kept off every indication of fatigue , and made her only fearful of betraying herself to her sister .
Marianne looked with amazement at Edward , with compassion at her sister .
I am by no means assured of his regard for me .
His mother wished to interest him in political concerns , to get him into parliament , or to see him connected with some of the great men of the day .
I felt that I admired you , but I told myself it was only friendship ; and till I began to make comparisons between yourself and Lucy , I did not know how far I was got .
You have proved your heart less wicked , much less wicked .
You , Miss Dashwood , would give a general commission for every new print of merit to be sent you -- and as for Marianne , I know her greatness of soul , there would not be music enough in London to content her .
On this point Sir John could give more certain intelligence ; and he told them that Mr. Willoughby had no property of his own in the country ; that he resided there only while he was visiting the old lady at Allenham Court , to whom he was related , and whose possessions he was to inherit ; adding , Yes , yes , he is very well worth catching I can tell you , Miss Dashwood ; he has a pretty little estate of his own in Somersetshire besides ; and if I were you , I would not give him up to my younger sister , in spite of all this tumbling down hills .
Elinor could only smile .
Elinor repeated the particulars of it , as she had given them to John ; and their effect on Robert , though very different , was not less striking than it had been on  him .
But why should you think , said Lucy , looking ashamed of her sister , that there are not as many genteel young men in Devonshire as Sussex ? 
The former left them soon after tea to fulfill her evening engagements ; and Elinor was obliged to assist in making a whist table for the others .
Who is to dance ? 
Elinor had just been congratulating herself , in the midst of her perplexity , that however difficult it might be to express herself properly by letter , it was at least preferable to giving the information by word of mouth , when her visitor entered , to force her upon this greatest exertion of all .
Oh , no ; but if mama had not objected to it , I dare say he would have liked it of all things .
In seasons of cheerfulness , no temper could be more cheerful than hers , or possess , in a greater degree , that sanguine expectation of happiness which is happiness itself .
The tea things were brought in , and already had Marianne been disappointed more than once by a rap at a neighbouring door , when a loud one was suddenly heard which could not be mistaken for one at any other house , Elinor felt secure of its announcing Willoughby's approach , and Marianne , starting up , moved towards the door .
I always preferred the church , as I still do .
Elinor flattered herself that some one of their connections in London would write to them to announce the event , and give farther particulars , -- but day after day passed off , and brought no letter , no tidings .
The shock which her marriage had given me , he continued , in a voice of great agitation , was of trifling weight -- was nothing to what I felt when I heard , about two years afterwards , of her divorce .
Dear Edward ! she cried , this is a moment of great happiness ! -- This would almost make amends for every thing !
Elinor attempted no more .
My love , it will be scarcely a separation .
Elinor was not prepared for such a question , and having no answer ready , was obliged to adopt the simple and common expedient , of asking what he meant ? 
Would he have been less gay or less happy in the smiles of your sister ? 
She was not in a humour , however , to regard it as an affront , and affecting to take no notice of what passed , by instantly talking of something else , she internally resolved henceforward to catch every opportunity of eyeing the hair and of satisfying herself , beyond all doubt , that it was exactly the shade of her own .
On Edward's side , more particularly , there was a deficiency of all that a lover ought to look and say on such an occasion .
He really felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion ; for the very exertion to which he had limited the performance of his promise to his father was by this arrangement rendered impracticable .
I am come here to bespeak Fanny a seal .
But one thing may be said for me :  even in that horrid state of selfish vanity , I did not know the extent of the injury I meditated , because I did not  then  know what it was to love .
Remember me kindly to her .
Elinor joyfully profited by the first of these proposals , and thus by a little of that address which Marianne could never condescend to practise , gained her own end , and pleased Lady Middleton at the same time .
Elinor's curiosity to see Mrs. Ferrars was satisfied .
I have frequently detected myself in such kind of mistakes , said Elinor , in a total misapprehension of character in some point or other :  fancying people so much more gay or grave , or ingenious or stupid than they really are , and I can hardly tell why or in what the deception originated .
The knowledge of what her mother must be feeling as the carriage stopped the door , -- of her doubt -- her dread , -- perhaps her despair ! -- and of what  she  had to tell ! with such knowledge it was impossible to be calm .
Not at all -- I never saw him ; but I fancy he is very unlike his brother -- silly and a great coxcomb .
What do you mean ? 
She was debating within herself on the eligibility of beginning her story directly , or postponing it till Marianne were in stronger health ; and they crept on for a few minutes in silence .
On one side you look across the bowling-green , behind the house , to a beautiful hanging wood , and on the other you have a view of the church and village , and , beyond them , of those fine bold hills that we have so often admired .
There now ; you see how droll he is .
A room or two can easily be added ; and if my friends find no difficulty in travelling so far to see me , I am sure I will find none in accommodating them .
It is a great way , you know , from hence to Barton .
Elinor could no longer witness this torrent of unresisted grief in silence .
Did you never hear him talk of Mr. Pratt ? 
Yes , ma'am .
Such a scoundrel of a fellow ! such a deceitful dog !
Edward assured them himself of his being in town , within a very short time , by twice calling in Berkeley Street .
A present of fifty pounds , now and then , will prevent their ever being distressed for money , and will , I think , be amply discharging my promise to my father .
She got up to examine them .
But it was then too late , and with a countenance meaning to be open , she sat down again and talked of the weather .
I am  not  going to write to my mother , replied Marianne , hastily , and as if wishing to avoid any farther inquiry .
Indeed , I can easily believe that it was a very great relief to you , to acknowledge your situation to me , and be assured that you shall never have reason to repent it .
Some vague report had reached her before of my attachment to some young lady in Devonshire , and what had passed within her observation the preceding evening had marked who the young lady was , and made her more jealous than ever .
No wonder .
When they stopped at the door , Mrs. Jennings recollected that there was a lady at the other end of the street on whom she ought to call ; and as she had no business at Gray's , it was resolved , that while her young friends transacted their's , she should pay her visit and return for them .
But pray , Colonel , how came you to conjure out that I should be in town today ? 
This paragraph was of some importance to the prospects and conduct of Edward .
They are a very respectable family , Mr. Ferrars ; and towards us have behaved in the friendliest manner .
I am sure your mother will not object to it ; for I have had such good luck in getting my own children off my hands that she will think me a very fit person to have the charge of you ; and if I don't get one of you at least well married before I have done with you , it shall not be my fault .
A short , a very short time however must now decide what Willoughby's intentions were ; in all probability he was already in town .
It checked the idleness of one , and the business of the other .
But remember that the pain of parting from friends will be felt by every body at times , whatever be their education or state .
Some people imagine that there can be no accommodations , no space in a cottage ; but this is all a mistake .
Elinor looked at him with greater astonishment than ever .
And now do you pity me , Miss Dashwood ? or have I said all this to no purpose ? 
Elinor wished to talk of something else , but Lucy still pressed her to own that she had reason for her happiness ; and Elinor was obliged to go on .
He had just compunction enough for having done nothing for his sisters himself , to be exceedingly anxious that everybody else should do a great deal ; and an offer from Colonel Brandon , or a legacy from Mrs. Jennings , was the easiest means of atoning for his own neglect .
The house and the garden , with all the objects surrounding them , were now become familiar , and the ordinary pursuits which had given to Norland half its charms were engaged in again with far greater enjoyment than Norland had been able to afford , since the loss of their father .
In about half an hour her mother returned , and though her eyes were red , her countenance was not uncheerful .
It is so ridiculous !
And so saying , she took the screens out of her sister-in-law's hands , to admire them herself as they ought to be admired .
Marianne sighed out her similar apprehension ; and Elinor's heart wrung for the feelings of Edward , while braving his mother's threats , for a woman who could not reward him .
In comparison of Norland , it was poor and small indeed  ! -- but the tears which recollection called forth as they entered the house were soon dried away .
I saw her there whenever I could , and after the death of my brother , (which happened about five years ago , and which left to me the possession of the family property ,) she visited me at Delaford .
The third day succeeding their knowledge of the particulars , was so fine , so beautiful a Sunday as to draw many to Kensington Gardens , though it was only the second week in March .
I think , Edward , said Mrs. Dashwood , as they were at breakfast the last morning , you would be a happier man if you had any profession to engage your time and give an interest to your plans and actions .
They contained a noble piece of water -- a sail on which was to a form a great part of the morning's amusement ; cold provisions were to be taken , open carriages only to be employed , and every thing conducted in the usual style of a complete party of pleasure .
Having now said enough to make his poverty clear , and to do away the necessity of buying a pair of ear-rings for each of his sisters , in his next visit at Gray's , his thoughts took a cheerfuller turn , and he began to congratulate Elinor on having such a friend as Mrs. Jennings .
You know his hand , I dare say , a charming one it is ; but that is not written so well as usual .
There is no persuading you to change your mind , Brandon , I know of old , said Sir John , when once you are determined on anything .
I declare , I have no patience with your sister ; and I hope , with all my heart , it will be a match in spite of her .
Aye , my dear , that I do , indeed .
Marianne gave a violent start , fixed her eyes upon Elinor , saw her turning pale , and fell back in her chair in hysterics .
Willing therefore to delay the evil hour , she resolved to wait till her sister's health were more secure , before she appointed it .
Oh , don't think of me ! she replied with spirited earnestness , though her eyes were filled with tears as she spoke , don't think of  my  health .
All these jealousies and discontents , however , were so totally unsuspected by Mrs. Jennings , that she thought it a delightful thing for the girls to be together ; and generally congratulated her young friends every night , on having escaped the company of a stupid old woman so long .
I had not thought of that .
His appearance however was not unpleasing , in spite of his being in the opinion of Marianne and Margaret an absolute old bachelor , for he was on the wrong side of five and thirty ; but though his face was not handsome , his countenance was sensible , and his address was particularly gentlemanlike .
She is only grown a little more grave than she was .
I am sure she will be married to Mr. Willoughby very soon .
The Colonel , too ! -- perhaps scarcely less an object of pity !
In Mrs. Dashwood's estimation he was as faultless as in Marianne's ; and Elinor saw nothing to censure in him but a propensity , in which he strongly resembled and peculiarly delighted her sister , of saying too much what he thought on every occasion , without attention to persons or circumstances .
And are they going farther westward ? 
When the weather is settled , and I have recovered my strength , said she , we will take long walks together every day .
I shall then go post .
He was afraid of catching cold I dare say , and invented this trick for getting out of it .
Why did not you ask the Gilberts to come to us today ? 
Mr. Edward Ferrars , the very young man I used to joke with you about (but however , as it turns out , I am monstrous glad there was never any thing in it) , Mr. Edward Ferrars , it seems , has been engaged above this twelvemonth to my cousin Lucy !
You , my mother , and Margaret , must henceforth be all the world to me ; you will share my affections entirely between you .
But I am determined to set for it the very first opportunity .
Is every thing finally settled ? 
She liked him , however , upon the whole , much better than she had expected , and in her heart was not sorry that she could like him no more ; not sorry to be driven by the observation of his epicurism , his selfishness , and his conceit , to rest with complacency on the remembrance of Edward's generous temper , simple taste , and diffident feelings .
He made no answer ; and soon afterwards , by the removal of the tea-things , and the arrangement of the card parties , the subject was necessarily dropped .
I am amazingly glad you did not keep to  your word .
Then continuing his former tone , he said , And yet this house you would spoil , Mrs. Dashwood ? 
Marianne entered the house with a heart swelling with emotion from the consciousness of being only eighty miles from Barton , and not thirty from Combe Magna ; and before she had been five minutes within its walls , while the others were busily helping Charlotte to show her child to the housekeeper , she quitted it again , stealing away through the winding shrubberies , now just beginning to be in beauty , to gain a distant eminence ; where , from its Grecian temple , her eye , wandering over a wide tract of country to the south-east , could fondly rest on the farthest ridge of hills in the horizon , and fancy that from their summits Combe Magna might be seen .
Elinor saw that it  was  his hand , and she could doubt no longer .
They will be brought up , said he , in a serious accent , to be as unlike myself as is possible .
Oh , don't be so sly before us , said Mrs. Palmer ; for we know all about it , I assure you ; and I admire your taste very much , for I think he is extremely handsome .
For many years of her life she had had two sons ; but the crime and annihilation of Edward a few weeks ago , had robbed her of one ; the similar annihilation of Robert had left her for a fortnight without any ; and now , by the resuscitation of Edward , she had one again .
All within Elinor's breast was satisfaction , silent and strong .
Determined not to quit Marianne , though hopeless of contributing , at present , to her ease , she hurried away to excuse herself from attending Mrs. Jennings , on account of her sister being indisposed .
Upon my word , said Mr. Dashwood , I believe you are perfectly right .
He is always out of humour .
How is she , Miss Dashwood ? 
As she said this , she sunk into a reverie for a few moments ; but rousing herself again , Now , Edward , said she , calling his attention to the prospect , here is Barton valley .
If we could be certain that it would be only for a while !
I am almost sure it is , for I saw him cut it off .
I think him every thing that is worthy and amiable .
I  will  be calm , I  will  be mistress of myself .
He is the most fearful of giving pain , of wounding expectation , and the most incapable of being selfish , of any body I ever saw .
And what , said Mrs. Dashwood , is my dear prudent Elinor going to suggest ? 
On the morning of the third day however , the gloomy anticipations of both were almost done away ; for when Mr. Harris arrived , he declared his patient materially better .
And then lowering her voice , I suppose Mrs. Jennings has heard all about it .
Elinor blushed for the insincerity of Edward's future wife , and replied , This compliment would effectually frighten me from giving any opinion on the subject had I formed one .
We never could agree in our choice of a profession .
He dared not come to Bartlett's Buildings for fear of detection , and though their mutual impatience to meet , was not to be told , they could do nothing at present but write .
These difficulties , indeed , with a heart so alienated from Lucy , might not press very hard upon his patience ; but melancholy was the state of the person by whom the expectation of family opposition and unkindness , could be felt as a relief !
No , said he , I never said any thing so irrational .
When I came to you last week and found you alone , I came determined to know the truth ; though irresolute what to do when it  was  known .
In the present instance , this last-arrived lady allowed her fancy to so far outrun truth and probability , that on merely hearing the name of the Miss Dashwoods , and understanding them to be Mr. Dashwood's sisters , she immediately concluded them to be staying in Harley Street ; and this misconstruction produced within a day or two afterwards , cards of invitation for them as well as for their brother and sister , to a small musical party at her house .
Poor Edward muttered something , but what it was , nobody knew , not even himself .
Will you come and spend some time at Cleveland this Christmas ? 
By which the Colonel was surprised to find that  she  was considering Mr. Ferrars's marriage as the certain consequence of the presentation ; for he did not suppose it possible that Delaford living could supply such an income , as anybody in his style of life would venture to settle on , and he said so .
It was very well known that no affection was ever supposed to exist between the children of any man by different marriages ; and why was he to ruin himself , and their poor little Harry , by giving away all his money to his half sisters ? 
I only know that I never yet heard her admit any instance of a second attachment's being pardonable .
But if I dared tell you all , you would not be so much surprised .
Every circumstance belonging to him was interesting .
She would have been glad to know when these difficulties were to cease , this opposition was to yield , when Mrs. Ferrars would be reformed , and her son be at liberty to be happy .
In this affair it can only do harm ; more so perhaps than in many cases of a similar kind , for it has been attended by circumstances which , for the sake of every one concerned in it , make it unfit to become the public conversation .
Here comes Marianne , cried Sir John .
Music seems scarcely to attract him , and though he admires Elinor's drawings very much , it is not the admiration of a person who can understand their worth .
I was most uncommonly shocked , indeed !
I thought we  had  been safe .
At my time of life opinions are tolerably fixed .
She still screamed and sobbed lustily , kicked her two brothers for offering to touch her , and all their united soothings were ineffectual till Lady Middleton luckily remembering that in a scene of similar distress last week , some apricot marmalade had been successfully applied for a bruised temple , the same remedy was eagerly proposed for this unfortunate scratch , and a slight intermission of screams in the young lady on hearing it , gave them reason to hope that it would not be rejected .
 You  must have seen the difference as well as I .
I do not know what you and Mr. Willoughby will do between you about her .
And there , beneath that farthest hill , which rises with such grandeur , is our cottage .
He too was much distressed ; and they sat down together in a most promising state of embarrassment .
It is not actually settled , but there is such a thing in agitation .
Oh !
She was on the point of sending again for Mr. Harris , or if  he  could not come , for some other advice , when the former -- but not till after five o'clock -- arrived .
When they were seated in the dining room , Sir John observed with regret that they were only eight all together .
She must be attached to you , or she would not have married you .
The work of one moment was destroyed by the next .
I have no notion of people's making such a to-do about money and greatness .
It seems quite ridiculous .
Some more of the Careys came to dinner , and they had the pleasure of sitting down nearly twenty to table , which Sir John observed with great contentment .
Oh , dear , that is a great pity ! but such old friends as Lucy and me ! -- I think she might see  us  ; and I am sure we would not speak a word .
But you , you above all , above my mother , had been wronged by me .
When Sir John returned , he joined most heartily in the general regret on so unfortunate an event ; concluding however by observing , that as they were all got together , they must do something by way of being happy ; and after some consultation it was agreed , that although happiness could only be enjoyed at Whitwell , they might procure a tolerable composure of mind by driving about the country .
In one circumstance only , my Marianne , may your destiny be different from her's !
What formidable obstacle is she now to bring forward ? 
Elinor , though never less disposed to speak than at that moment , obliged herself to answer such an attack as this , and , therefore , trying to smile , replied , And have you really , Ma'am , talked yourself into a persuasion of my sister's being engaged to Mr. Willoughby ? 
Yes ; it is about Miss Williams , I am sure .
And I really believe he  has  the most delicate conscience in the world ; the most scrupulous in performing every engagement , however minute , and however it may make against his interest or pleasure .
I consider him , on the contrary , as a very respectable man , who has every body's good word , and nobody's notice ; who , has more money than he can spend , more time than he knows how to employ , and two new coats every year .
By reading only six hours a-day , I shall gain in the course of a twelvemonth a great deal of instruction which I now feel myself to want .
He stopped at their gate .
You may guess , after all these expenses , how very far we must be from being rich , and how acceptable Mrs. Ferrars's kindness is .
So you may think what a blow it was to all her vanity and pride .
Does Elinor expect him already ? 
Will you be so good as to tell him that the living of Delaford , now just vacant , as I am informed by this day's post , is his , if he think it worth his acceptance -- but  that  , perhaps , so unfortunately circumstanced as he is now , it may be nonsense to appear to doubt ; I only wish it were more valuable .
There was nothing in any of the party which could recommend them as companions to the Dashwoods ; but the cold insipidity of Lady Middleton was so particularly repulsive , that in comparison of it the gravity of Colonel Brandon , and even the boisterous mirth of Sir John and his mother-in-law was interesting .
Colonel , I do not know what you and I shall do without the Miss Dashwoods ; -- was Mrs. Jennings's address to him when he first called on her , after their leaving her was settled -- for they are quite resolved upon going home from the Palmers ; -- and how forlorn we shall be , when I come back ! -- Lord ! we shall sit and gape at one another as dull as two cats .
He had nothing to urge against it , but still resisted the idea of a letter of proper submission ; and therefore , to make it easier to him , as he declared a much greater willingness to make mean concessions by word of mouth than on paper , it was resolved that , instead of writing to Fanny , he should go to London , and personally entreat her good offices in his favour .
To-morrow , Marianne !
It was painful to him even to keep a third cousin to himself .
How much they must enjoy it !
At Longstaple ! he replied , with an air of surprise .
We do not live a great way from him in the country , you know .
How could such a thought occur to you ? 
Elinor saw , with concern , the excess of her sister's sensibility ; but by Mrs. Dashwood it was valued and cherished .
But I hardly know -- the misery that you have inflicted -- I hardly know what could have made it worse .
Miss Dashwood had a delicate complexion , regular features , and a remarkably pretty figure .
Use your own discretion , however , in communicating to her what I have told you .
At last the affair was decided .
What immediately followed is known .
I have no patience with him .
Lord bless you , my dear !
He paused for her assent and compassion ; and she forced herself to say --   Your expenses both in town and country must certainly be considerable ; but your income is a large one .
When there , at her own particular request , for she was impatient to pour forth her thanks to him for fetching her mother , Colonel Brandon was invited to visit her .
It will only be sending Betty by the coach , and I hope I can afford that .
What she would engage to do towards augmenting their income was next to be considered ; and here it plainly appeared , that though Edward was now her only son , he was by no means her eldest ; for while Robert was inevitably endowed with a thousand pounds a-year , not the smallest objection was made against Edward's taking orders for the sake of two hundred and fifty at the utmost ; nor was anything promised either for the present or in future , beyond the ten thousand pounds , which had been given with Fanny .
As such , however , they were treated by her with quiet civility ; and by her husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybody beyond himself , his wife , and their child .
Well , sir , and what said Mrs. Smith ? 
The merest awkward country girl , without style , or elegance , and almost without beauty .
 That  was exactly like Robert , was his immediate observation .
That would not do .
This hint was enough , Lucy recollected herself instantly and replied , Indeed you are very much mistaken , Lady Middleton ; I am only waiting to know whether you can make your party without me , or I should have been at my filigree already .
Between Barton and Delaford , there was that constant communication which strong family affection would naturally dictate ; -- and among the merits and the happiness of Elinor and Marianne , let it not be ranked as the least considerable , that though sisters , and living almost within sight of each other , they could live without disagreement between themselves , or producing coolness between their husbands .But you have such a generous spirit !
Am I , -- be it only one degree , -- am I less guilty in your opinion than I was before ? 
They then talked on for a few minutes longer without her catching a syllable , when another lucky stop in Marianne's performance brought her these words in the Colonel's calm voice , --   I am afraid it cannot take place very soon .
But gaiety never was a part of  my  character .
She rather suspected it to be so , on the very first evening of their being together , from his listening so attentively while she sang to them ; and when the visit was returned by the Middletons' dining at the cottage , the fact was ascertained by his listening to her again .
She does not deserve your compassion .
Perhaps Mrs. Jennings was in hopes , by this vigorous sketch of their future ennui , to provoke him to make that offer , which might give himself an escape from it ; and if so , she had soon afterwards good reason to think her object gained ; for , on Elinor's moving to the window to take more expeditiously the dimensions of a print , which she was going to copy for her friend , he followed her to it with a look of particular meaning , and conversed with her there for several minutes .
Mr. Ferrars , I believe , is entirely dependent on his mother .
John is in such spirits today ! said she , on his taking Miss Steele's pocket handkerchief , and throwing it out of window -- He is full of monkey tricks .
But I have no right , and I could have no chance of succeeding .
Had you married , you must have been always poor .
She did her best when thus called on , by speaking of Lady Middleton with more warmth than she felt , though with far less than Miss Lucy .
I certainly did not seek your confidence , said Elinor ; but you do me no more than justice in imagining that I may be depended on .
In the height of her morality , good woman ! she offered to forgive the past , if I would marry Eliza .